Assad will never give up chemical stockpile, defected Syrian General al-Sakat tells Amanpour

A defected Syrian general told CNN’s Christiane Amanpour on Tuesday that Bashar al-Assad will never give up his chemical stockpile.

“The locations of most of the scientific research centers in Syria and the storage facilities are known and under surveillance, thus, he will give up those centers and facilities for sure without lying. That said however, Bashar al-Assad will not give up the chemical stockpile,” Syrian Brigadier General Zaher al-Sakat said.

General al-Sakat says that he defected from the Syrian military after he was ordered to use chemical agents; he says he swapped the chemicals out for something non-toxic to fool his commanders.

The general said that in addition to four secret locations within Syria, the regime is currently transferring chemical weapons to Iraq and Lebanon, an enormous claim that the commander of the opposition Free Syrian Army, General Salim Idriss, recently also made to Amanpour.

Lebanon and Iraq denied the claims at the time, and CNN's Barbara Starr reported that, if true, the allegation would fundamentally shift the assessments of U.S. intelligence officials.

Al-Sakat said that the oppositions’ intelligence monitored “twenty eight large trucks moving from Jdeedet Yabous, toward Lebanon, then to Hezbollah, which were heavily guarded. They also found in the Frouqlus area more than fifty large Mercedes and Volvo trucks, also heavily guarded, moving in the direction of Iraq.”


Al-Sakat said that the trucks were not attacked “so as not to spread chemical weapons or agents.”

The general said that they are unsure whether the trucks crossed into Iraq.

General al-Sakat recounted to Amanpour the events that he says made him defect.

“In the beginning of the protest,” he said, “the field commanders used non-lethal chemical harassing agents.”

“But when I was given an order by my immediate commander, Lieutenant General Ali Hasan Ammar, the commander of the fifth division, to use the lethal chemical agents,” he told Amanpour, “I replaced it with diluted bleach and buried those lethal agents in the ground.”

The chemical al-Sakat was ordered to use, he said, was not sarin – which was used in the now-infamous August 21 attack outside Damascus – but phosgene, a chemical first used in WWI that causes severe respiratory problems.

“We should distinguish between three kinds of Chemical weapons,” he said.

“First, the non-lethal harassing agents that were used in the beginning of the protests and were fired by automatic weapons and bombs to disperse the protesters.”

“Two, the incapacitating agents that were used in land mines which would produce a cloud of gas that spreads in an area, harming civilians.”

“Three, lethal agents such as Sarin and VX gas were used loaded into mortar shells, cruise missiles and weapons bays of fighter jets,” he told Amanpour. “I was given an order to use the number two stage of chemical weapons, and I knew then that this regime will end up using lethal chemical weapons against the civilians, therefore I defected.”

General al-Sakat claims that he was given the order to use chemical weapons by his direct commander, but lays ultimate blame at the feet of Bashar al-Assad.

“The decision to use the lethal chemicals weapons such as sarin, VX, and Iprit [mustard gas],” he said, “is a strategic-military decision that would be made by the Commander in chief of the armed forces, who is Bashar al-Assad. He is the Commander in Chief.”




Sen. Menendez on Syria: I take this obligation very seriously
Senator Robert Menedez (D-NJ), Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations committee, appeared on “New Day” to talk about the committee’s resolution on Syria. When Cuomo asked why he wants to move forward with military action if polls show that most Americans are not on board, Senator Menendez said that he takes “this obligation” seriously and the U.S. needs to “send a message to global actors.”
“I take this obligation… very seriously. As I said, I voted against the war in Iraq when the vote for the war was popular…. I have voted and advocated a quicker withdrawal in Afghanistan,” Senator Menendez said. “I believe, that in this instance, not only is the punishment for the use of weapons of mass destruction via chemical weapons in violation of international law and needs a targeted military response, but also we send a message to the Ayatollah in Iran, do not march toward those nuclear weapons you’re trying to acquire. We send a message to the dictator of North Korea – we’re serious about protecting South Korea and the Korean Peninsula. And we send a message to global actors. That is in our national security.”




Obama: It's the world's 'red line' on Syria; Senate panel backs military strike plan
President Barack Obama said Wednesday that the world set a red line against chemical weapons use that he now seeks to apply to Syria, while a Senate committee approved a resolution authorizing the U.S. military attack that he is planning.
By a 10-7 vote, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee passed the resolution that authorizes a limited military response, giving Obama an initial victory in his push to win congressional approval.
The measure now goes to the full Senate for debate next week. The Democratic-led chamber is expected to pass it, but the outcome is less clear in the Republican-led House where top diplomatic and military officials made their case on Wednesday for action.
Liberal Democrats, tea party libertarians and moderates from both sides questioned Secretary of State John Kerry, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel and Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Martin Dempsey about whether limited military attacks can change anything and if they will lead to U.S. involvement in another war.
"What are the chances of escalation? Are different scenarios accounted for? If our credibility is on the line now as is argued what about if Assad retaliates?" asked GOP Rep. Ed Royce of California, the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
In Sweden on the first of a three-day overseas trip that includes the G-20 summit in Russia, Obama told reporters that the red line he spoke of last year regarding Syria's use of chemical weapons came from international treaties and past congressional action, rather than something he "made up."
Obama also insisted he had the authority to order attacks -- expected to be cruise missile strikes on Syrian military command targets -- even if Congress rejects his request for authorization.
America "recognizes that if the international community fails to maintain certain norms, standards, laws, governing how countries interact and how people are treated, that over time this world becomes less safe," Obama said. "It becomes more dangerous not only for those people who are subjected to these horrible crimes, but to all of humanity."
He cited World War II as an example, saying "the people of Europe are certainly familiar with what happens when the international community finds excuses not to act." At the same time, "as commander in chief, I always preserve the right and the responsibility to act on behalf of America's national security," Obama said.
Conservative critics have said Obama painted himself into a corner with his statement last year that Syria's use of chemical weapons was a red line that would change his approach to its civil war.
Obama: It is the world's red line
"A red line for us is we start seeing a whole bunch of chemical weapons moving around or being utilized," Obama said in August 2012. "That would change my calculus."
Now, critics on the right say, he must respond to an alleged chemical weapons attack outside Damascus by the Syrian regime that Kerry said killed more than 1,400 people or lose credibility.
The administration and top congressional leaders attempted to blunt that criticism on Tuesday during debate on Capitol Hill. Even House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, the chamber's No. 2 Republican, said any president would have drawn that red line based on international norms.
Obama made that same argument on Wednesday, saying: "I didn't set a red line. The world set a red line."
"The world set a red line when governments representing 98 percent of the world's population said the use of chemical weapons are abhorrent and passed a treaty forbidding their use, even when countries are engaged in war," he said at a joint news conference with Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt on the first day of a four-day trip that includes the G-20 summit in Russia.
"Congress set a red line when it ratified that treaty," Obama continued. "Congress set a red line when it indicated that in a piece of legislation entitled the 'Syria Accountability Act' that some of the horrendous things that are happening on the ground there need to be answered for."
Sounding exasperated, Obama added: "That wasn't something I just kind of made up. I didn't pluck it out of thin air. There's a reason for it."
Obama prods international community to act
Asked about whether he was seeking to save face, Obama insisted that "my credibility is not on the line -- the international community's credibility is on the line."
He framed the question for the United Nations and the global community at large as: "Are we going to try to find a reason not to act? And if that's the case, then I think the (world) community should admit it."
Opposition by Russia, a Syrian ally, has scuttled U.S. and British efforts to get the U.N. Security Council to authorize a military response against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's regime.
U.N. inspectors returned from Syria last week from their mission to confirm if chemical weapons were used, but Kerry said Wednesday it would take three weeks for samples collected to analyzed and results announced.
"I respect the U.N. process," Obama said while standing next to Reinfeldt, who opposes military intervention without U.N. approval.
"We agree that the international community cannot be silent," Obama added, saying also that the U.N. investigators had done "heroic work."
Noting the U.N. team's mandate was only to determine the use of chemical weapons, and not identify who used them, Obama repeated past statements that U.S. intelligence has confirmed chemical weapons use beyond any reasonable doubt and has further confirmed that al-Assad's regime "was the source."
"I do think that we have to act, because if we don't, we are effectively saying that even though we may condemn it and issue resolutions and so forth and so on, somebody who is not shamed by resolutions can continue to act with impunity," Obama said.
International norms then "begin to erode," he added, and "other despots and authoritarian regimes can start looking and say, 'that's something we can get away with.'"
He described the intended U.S. response as "limited in time and in scope, targeted at the specific task of degrading (al-Assad's) capabilities, and deterring the use of those weapons, again."
More than 100,000 killed in Syrian conflict
The United Nations has said more than 100,000 people -- including many civilians -- have been killed since the popular uprising spiraled into a civil war in 2011.
In Washington, the resolution passed by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee set a 60-day deadline for use of force in Syria, with an option for an additional 30 days.
An amendment accepted by the panel from Republican Sen. John McCain of Arizona and Democratic Sen. Christopher Coons of Delaware added language to say the military response was intended to reverse Assad's battlefield momentum, a stronger objective than degrading the Syrian regime's chemical weapons capabilities as Hagel told the committee on Tuesday.
If Assad "remains in an advantageous position, he will never leave Syria," said McCain, who has been pushing for a more robust U.S. response. "He has to know that he is losing and that way you get a negotiated settlement for his departure."
The resolution also makes clear there would be no U.S. boots on the ground as part of a response in Syria.
A White House statement welcomed the panel's vote, saying "the military action authorized in the resolution would uphold America's national security interests by degrading Assad's chemical weapons capability and deterring the future use of these weapons, even as we pursue a broader strategy of strengthening the opposition to hasten a political transition in Syria."
After the vote, senators on the panel made statements that explained their thinking, with some calling for more efforts to build an international coalition before any attack takes place.
"Vietnam started with U.S. advisers and a limited Naval presence. It led to an all-out war," noted Democratic Sen. Tom Udall of New Mexico, who opposed the resolution.
Kerry, Hagel and Dempsey appeared before the Senate panel on Tuesday to press for approval of authorization.
Tough questioning by House panel
The same trio then faced questions on Wednesday before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, with Royce saying the administration's Syria policy had been adrift for two years.
At the same time, Royce acknowledged there were "no easy answers" on Syria, and attempting to deter chemical weapons use was worth considering despite public skepticism for U.S. military involvement.
Kerry said Obama sought authorization for a response to the use of banned weapons, not a full military intervention.
"We are not asking America to go to war," he said. "We all agree, there will be no American boots on the ground."
In response to a question, Hagel put the cost of the limited response under consideration at "tens of millions" of dollars.
Most of the focus of administration lobbying has been on the House, where opposition by liberal Democrats and libertarian conservatives, as well as the bitterly partisan political environment of the Republican-led chamber, make passage of Obama's authorization proposal uncertain.
House Speaker John Boehner and Cantor, the No. 2 Republican, both have endorsed a U.S. military response, but Wednesday's hearing showed widespread concerns and outside opposition from across the political spectrum.
Polls also show that a majority of Americans oppose a U.S. military strike on Syria.
In the Senate, a Democratic source familiar with Majority Leader Harry Reid's thinking told CNN that Reid is confident any authorization measure will pass his chamber. The source said it is likely 60 votes will be needed to overcome a filibuster, and Reid thinks the votes are there.
Before that, however, lawmakers will hear from the Russian government, which is moving ahead with its efforts to lobby Congress in an attempt to undercut Obama on Syria. Moscow has sent an official request to congressional leaders to meet with them.
"We're planning the visit," a Russian Embassy spokesman told CNN, "We can't tell you the exact time but it will be next week."
Boehner will not meet with the Russians, his spokesman said.




In Syria, U.N. inspectors find ‘clear and convincing’ evidence of chemical attack
U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon presented the Security Council with a report by a team of U.N. chemical weapons experts that shows gas-filled munitions were used in Syria.
UNITED NATIONS — U.N. inspectors found “clear and convincing evidence” that large quantities of the nerve gas sarin were used last month in Syria, the first confirmation by an internationally recognized team of experts that a chemical weapons attack took place.

The inspection report, presented to the U.N. Security Council on Monday, does not assess blame for the attack. But underlying evidence included in the report, including the trajectory of ­poison-filled rockets, was cited by the United States and its Western allies as proof of the Syrian government’s responsibility.
The inspectors’ conclusion “confirms the position of those of us who have said the regime is guilty,” French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said.

U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called the findings “beyond doubt and beyond the pale,” and a clear evidence of a war crime.

“The results are overwhelming and indisputable,” Ban said. “Eighty-five percent of the blood samples tested positive for sarin. A majority of the environmental samples confirmed the use of sarin. A majority of the rockets or rocket fragments recovered were found to be carrying sarin.”

International confirmation that the attack took place seemed anticlimactic after the events of last week, when Syria acknowledged for the first time that it possesses chemical weapons and agreed to surrender them, and the United States and Russia negotiated a plan to carry out the handover.

Syria and Russia still say the Aug. 21 attack in the suburbs of Damascus was perpetrated by rebels seeking to overthrow Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

Under the U.S.-Russia agreement, Syria must provide an inventory of its chemical stockpiles by the end of this week to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, based in The Hague. The OPCW, the body that carries out the international Chemical Weapons Convention, said Monday that it would begin drawing up a plan to “eliminate” the arsenal within “a matter of days.”

Inspection of Syria’s estimated 1,000 metric tons of poison material would begin in November, with destruction to take place next year.

Also Monday, President Obama signed an order waiving arms-control restrictions on the export of protective equipment and the provision of training to Syria. The action allows the shipment of U.S. gear to the OPCW for use in Syria, and permits equipment and training to be provided to nongovernmental organizations working with Syrian civilians and to approved rebel groups to shield themselves against any further chemical attacks.
A threat of force?

The U.S.-Russian road map also calls for a Security Council resolution that would punish Syria if it did not comply with the agreement. As council members debated its terms, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov criticized what he called “distorted” reports that it might include a threat of military force.

Vitaly Churkin, Russia’s U.N. ambassador, said suggestions that Russia has given “blanket” support for such a resolution mean the agreement is being “misinterpreted and misused by those who from time to time keep looking for a pretext to use military power.”
The agreement specifically refers to a resolution under Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter, which includes a provision on the use of force. But diplomats from Security Council member nations, speaking on the condition of anonymity about the closed-door discussions, said the resolution would more likely be governed by a different provision authorizing measures short of military action.

The diplomats referred to a Chapter 7 paragraph that suggests steps that include “complete or partial interruption of economic relations and of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio, and other means of communication, and the severance of diplomatic relations.”
If such measures prove “inadequate,” the chapter says, the Security Council “may” take military action “necessary to maintain or restore international peace and security.”

The distinction is an important one, because a council veto by Russia or China of any proposed resolution would probably upend the chemical weapons agreement.

As part of the accord, Lavrov and Secretary of State John F. Kerry agreed to devote new energy to convening a peace conference between the opposing sides in Syria’s civil war. Progress toward the conference, first agreed to earlier this year, has been elusive.

Assad and his Russian backers have rejected opposition demands that he be excluded from the conference and ultimately step down, and the opposition has never formally agreed to attend.

At a Moscow news conference, Lavrov indicated that the United States should be able to deliver the rebel delegation.

“First it was necessary to convince the opposition to participate in that conference, and now it is probably time to use another verb and force the opposition to participate,” Lavrov said, according to Russia’s Interfax news agency.

He said that he, Kerry and U.N. envoy Lakhdar Brahimi had agreed in talks last week that the conference should take place in Geneva “sometime in October.” Lavrov said, “We are ready to begin making arrangements even tomorrow.”

‘The pressure is on’

Kerry met in Paris on Monday with Fabius and his counterparts from Britain and Turkey to brief them on the terms of the agreement. He also met with Saudi Arabia’s foreign minister, Saud al-Faisal.
British Foreign Minister William Hague did not specify his government’s bottom line for a new Security Council resolution but said that “the pressure is on [Syria] to comply with this agreement in full. The world must be prepared to hold them to account if they don’t.”

Kerry went further. The chemical weapons deal “has to be enforced,” he said. “If the Assad regime believes that this is not enforceable and that we are not serious, they will play games.”

In Washington, Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), who has been among the loudest congressional voices urging a strike against Syria, said that without a military option, the weapons agreement is “not enforceable” and has “no credibility.”

“What they are promising is a laudable goal, but there is no real way to achieve it,” McCain said in an interview with CNN.

Kerry and McCain spoke before the release of the U.N. report, which was first presented to Ban on Monday morning by Ake Sellstrom, the head of the inspection team that visited the site of the Aug. 21 attack within days after it occurred.

Sellstrom’s team compiled evidence from a broad range of sources, including statements from more than 50 victims, first responders and medical specialists. The team also examined pieces of surface-to-surface rockets “capable of delivering significant chemical payloads,” the report said. Sarin was identified in the majority of the fragments, as well as in environmental and biomedical samples, including blood, urine and hair from the victims.

The 38-page document did not estimate the number of victims in the attack, which U.S. officials have said killed more than 1,400 people, including more than 400 children.

“Survivors reported an attack with shelling, followed by the onset of a common range of symptoms, including shortness of breath, disorientation, rhino­rrhea (runny nose), eye irritation, blurred vision, nausea, vomiting, general weakness, and eventual loss of consciousness,” the report said. “Those who went to assist . . . described seeing a large number of individuals lying on the ground, many of whom were deceased or unconscious.”




Work on Syria’s chemical weapons should not preclude removing Assad
THE OBAMA administration faces two distinct challenges in attempting to conclude a diplomatic deal to eliminate Syria’s massive arsenal of chemical weapons. The first is to agree with Russia on a workable plan for declaring, securing and then destroying munitions, chemical precursors and production facilities, with a clear timetable and close international monitoring, and to formalize that plan in a U.N. Security Council resolution. The second is to preserve the U.S. goal of ending the war in Syria through a political settlement that removes the regime of Bashar al-Assad.

So far, the first goal is looking like a huge, if not quite impossible, lift. Secretary of State John F. Kerry said two days of discussions with Russian officials in Geneva were “constructive,” though it wasn’t clear how much progress had been made. The Assad regime, for its part, informed the United Nations that it would join the treaty banning chemical weapons, while making clear that it would embrace the strategy of delay and obfuscation patented by Saddam Hussein and Kim Jong Il. Any declaration of its chemical assets, it suggested, could wait 30 days.
Mr. Kerry rejected that timetable, but the administration has refrained from setting out its deadline for reaching an agreement and has not spelled out its minimum conditions. That could prove to be a mistake if Russia and Syria seek to bog down the talks as a delaying tactic or to resist essential steps. Mr. Kerry would be wise to publicly state minimal U.S. terms and make clear that the United States will use force against Syria if there is no agreement within weeks — say, by the U.N. General Assembly meeting at the end of the month. A congressional authorization of force in the absence of a U.N. disarmament resolution, as has been proposed by bipartisan groups in both houses, would help.

While agreeing with Russia on a plan for Syria’s weapons will be difficult, it looks easy compared with the administration’s aim of advancing a political solution to the war. Though Mr. Kerry and Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov agreed Friday to work toward convening a peace conference, both Russia and Syria appear intent on using the chemical weapons diplomacy to isolate and undermine the Syrian opposition. Russian President Vladi­mir Putin has said repeatedly that the United States must forswear military intervention in Syria in exchange for an agreement; Mr. Assad said Washington must end its support for the rebels, who only now are beginning to receive U.S. arms deliveries.
Compliance with such demands would make a political settlement impossible and encourage the regime’s current strategy of crushing the opposition by force — a goal that Mr. Putin likely shares. The mainstream Free Syrian Army is already resistant to joining negotiations with the Assad regime; a cutoff of U.S. assistance would eliminate Washington’s leverage. As a practical matter, it would also make any deal on a transitional government impossible: The Assad clique will not yield or be forced from power unless it is losing the war.

Administration officials have been saying that support for the rebels is not up for negotiation and that the option of U.S. force remains open. Any diplomatic solution in Syria will depend on President Obama sticking to those positons. He should not barter Syria’s future for an agreement on its chemical weapons.






Draft resolution on Syria would limit strike to 60 days
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee will take up a bipartisan authorization bill Wednesday for the use of force in Syria.
The resolution, which limits the authorization to 60 days with an option for an additional 30 days, was revised to address some of the concerns expressed during a Senate committee hearing Tuesday.
At the hearing, top U.S. officials faced tough questions from senators about plans for military strikes as House leaders lined up behind President Barack Obama's call to punish Syria for an August poison gas attack near Damascus.
Afterward, Foreign Relations Chairman Robert Menendez, D-New Jersey, said he and the committee's ranking Republican, Tennessee Sen. Bob Corker successfully negotiated the revised resolution.
According to a copy of that text, provided to CNN by a legislative source, the bill limits the authorization to 60 days with an option for an additional 30-day deadline. It also makes clear there would be no U.S. armed forces on the ground in Syria.
"Together we have pursued a course of action that gives the President the authority he needs to deploy force in response to the Assad regime's criminal use of chemical weapons against the Syrian people, while assuring that the authorization is narrow and focused, limited in time, and assures that the Armed Forces of the United States will not be deployed for combat operations in Syria," Menendez said in a statement.
"With this agreement, we are one step closer to granting the President the authority to act in our national security interest," he added.
Kerry: Syria isn't Iraq, we've got the proof
Secretary of State John Kerry, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel and Gen. Martin Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, appeared before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee as the Obama administration lobbied Congress to authorize military action against Syria. From the outset, Kerry addressed the shadow of claims offered in the buildup to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, reassuring committee members that the intelligence linking Syrian government forces to the August 21 attack was solid.
"We are especially sensitive, Chuck and I, to never again asking any member of Congress to take a vote on faulty intelligence," said Kerry, who like Hagel, voted as a senator to authorize the Iraq invasion. "And that is why our intelligence community has scrubbed and re-scrubbed the evidence. We have declassified unprecedented amounts of information, and we ask the American people and the rest of the world to judge that information."
Kerry said that intelligence includes the trajectory of the rockets used to deliver the gas, Syrian military instructions to troops to don gas masks and concerns by top Syrian officials that U.N. inspectors would discover evidence of the attack.
"Not one rocket landed in regime-controlled territory -- not one," Kerry said. "All of them landed in opposition-controlled or contested territory."
Kerry said Obama isn't asking the United States to go to war -- just "to degrade and deter" the capacity of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to launch another chemical attack. But he and Hagel faced tough questions from senators concerned that giving the administration the green light to attack Syria would draw the United States into that country's civil war, now 2 1/2 years old.
"Americans are understandably weary after the fiasco in Iraq and over a decade of war," said Sen. Tom Udall, D-New Mexico. "How can this administration make a guarantee that our military actions will be limited? How can we guarantee that one surgical strike will have any impact other than to tighten the vise grip that Assad has on his power, or allow rebels allied with al Qaeda to gain a stronger foothold in Syria?"
Read the draft resolution (.pdf)
Kerry said the administration has no intention of sending American ground troops to Syria "with respect to the civil war." But he opposed any effort to put a ban on deploying ground forces into a congressional resolution authorizing military action, leaving open the possibility that U.S. troops may have to seize chemical weapons "in the event Syria imploded" or if extremist groups were poised to obtain them.
Hagel: Risks of action, risks of inaction
Hagel said any military action "would be limited in duration and scope," and won't be aimed at settling the Syrian civil war by force. He testified that the administration's proposal would not authorize strikes outside Syria, against any other government or against non-state groups.
"There are always risks in taking action, but there are also risks with inaction," he said. "The Assad regime, under increasing pressure by the Syrian opposition, could feel empowered to carry out even more devastating chemical weapons attacks."
Likewise, Kerry warned that a failure to act would undermine American alliances, encourage other U.S. adversaries like Iran and North Korea and encourage al-Assad to use chemical weapons again.
U.S. officials have said the August 21 attack left more than 1,400 dead, and Obama said Tuesday that more than 400 of those were children. Syria denies government troops were behind the attack, arguing that they were the victims of a rebel chemical attack.
Syria's U.N. ambassador, Bashar al-Jaafari, told CNN's Christiane Amanpour that the allegations of poison gas use by his government "are false and unfounded." Al-Assad told the French newspaper Le Figaro on Monday that an attack on his country risks a regional war.
Administration officials and Obama himself have said the president has the authority to conduct military strikes even without congressional approval. But asked what the administration would do if Congress refused to authorize military action, Kerry said, "We're not contemplating that, because it's too dire."
Weapons inspectors from the United Nations are analyzing samples taken from the scene last week, but their results aren't expected to assign blame. The United States and its allies say the rebels have no capability to carry out a large-scale chemical weapons attack, however.
House leaders line up behind Obama
Earlier Tuesday, the leaders of both parties in the House of Representatives emerged from a White House meeting to support Obama's call for American strikes.
House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, told reporters the use of poison gas was "a barbarous act" to which only the United States is capable of responding. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-California, added that Washington must respond to actions "outside the circle of civilized human behavior."
Syria missile strike: What would happen next?
But in a written statement later, Boehner said it is up to Obama "to make his case to the American people and their elected representatives" -- including securing support from individual members.
"All votes authorizing the use of military force are conscience votes for members, and passage will require direct, continuous engagement from the White House," the speaker said.
No vote is scheduled before Congress returns from its summer recess on Monday. Kerry defended the delay to seek congressional authorization, saying the move gives the United States time to make its case while adding pressure on al-Assad.
"This is working," Kerry said. "There are defections taking place. There's great uncertainty in Syria. We are building support, a greater understanding, and I would far rather be playing our hand than his at this point in time."
Most of the focus of administration lobbying has been on the House. In the Senate, a Democratic source familiar with Majority Leader Harry Reid's thinking told CNN that Reid is confident any authorization measure will pass his chamber. The source said it is likely 60 votes will be needed to overcome a filibuster, and Reid thinks the votes are there.
U.N. chief calls for end to Security Council 'stalemate'
The United Nations has said more than 100,000 people -- including many civilians -- have been killed in Syria since a popular uprising spiraled into a civil war in 2011. Syrian opposition activists reported another 77 dead on Tuesday, mostly in Damascus and its suburbs.
New U.N. figures point to the staggering impact the war has had on the nation.
The number of Syrians who have fled their war-ravaged country has risen above 2 million, the U.N. refugee agency reported, an increase of nearly 1.8 million people over the past 12 months.
But at the United Nations, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged Security Council members to await test results on the samples collected by U.N. inspectors.
"We should avoid further militarization of the conflict and revitalize the search for a political settlement," Ban said. "I take note of the argument for action to prevent further uses of chemical weapons. At the same time, we must consider the impact of any punitive measure on efforts to prevent further bloodshed and facilitate a political resolution of the conflict. The turmoil in Syria and across the region serves nobody."
He urged member states to work through the Security Council, where Syrian allies Russia and China are expected to block any call for military action.
Is it 'High Noon' for Obama on Syria?
"The Security Council has a duty to move beyond the current stalemate and show leadership," Ban said. "This is a larger issue than the conflict in Syria. This is about our collective responsibility to humankind."
And al-Jaafari, the Syrian envoy, told CNN that all Syrians will be victims "of any escalation of the situation."
"We don't need wars. We need peaceful settlement of conflicts according to the charter of the United Nations," he said.
During Tuesday's hearing, Udall questioned whether the United States should be doing more to pressure Russia and China rather than going around the Security Council. Kerry said the Russians refused to sign off even on a resolution condemning a chemical attack that didn't assign blame.
"That doesn't mean we should turn our backs and say there's nothing we can do," Udall said.
But Kerry responded that if the Security Council is being blocked, "That doesn't mean we should turn our backs and say there's nothing we can do."
Military has concerns about Syria mission
U.N. inspectors await test results
U.N. weapons inspectors left Syria on Saturday with samples that will help determine whether chemical weapons were used in the August 21 attack. Those samples will all be at laboratories by Wednesday and will be tested "strictly according to internationally recognized standards," Ban told reporters at U.N. headquarters.
Those tests could take up to three weeks -- and even then, those tests will only determine whether a gas attack took place, not who was behind it.
Kerry said Sunday that hat blood and hair samples taken from medics at the scene of the alleged attack point to the nerve agent sarin. The samples reached U.S. hands "through an appropriate chain of custody, from east Damascus, from first responders," he said.
'Red line' debate: Are chemical weapons worse?
But David Kay, the former head of the U.S. weapons hunt in Iraq, said the "shadowing effect" of that war makes the U.N. inspectors' jobs more difficult.
"Remember, these results will be analyzed and re-analyzed around the world," said Kay, the former U.N. weapons inspector who ultimately determined Iraq had dismantled the chemical, nuclear and biological weapons programs used to justify the American-led invasion in 2003. "So as an inspector, you want to get it right rather than necessarily get it quick"
Kay told CNN the question has been settled for the Obama administration "and for many Americans, including myself. But that's not enough, because of Iraq."




Could Norway be key to a future Syria strike?
Editor’s note: Christopher Chivvis is a senior political scientist at the nonprofit, nonpartisan RAND Corporation and author of the book, Toppling Qaddafi. The views expressed are his own.
The White House has faced an increasingly uphill battle to gain domestic and international support for possible strikes against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, yet there may be a glimmer of hope on the horizon in the land of Fjords.
Earlier this month, Norway, traditionally one of America’s strongest NATO allies, elected a conservative new prime minister, Erna Solberg. Solberg comes to power as the Obama administration has struggled to win backing for strikes against the al-Assad regime in Syria – a struggle that has been complicated further by Syria’s acceptance of a Russia-backed plan that is supposed to see it give up its chemical weapons.
But if Syrian acceptance turns out to be a stalling tactic – as many believe it is – support for strikes from allies like Norway will be all the more important to the White House. Indeed, in the wake of the British parliament’s vote against intervention, smaller NATO countries like Norway could eventually play a significant role in helping the president make his case to the world.
Norway made a major contribution to the NATO operations that brought down Muammar Gadhafi in 2011, and was one of the few countries that actually flew strike missions over Libya.  At the time, then Defense Secretary Robert Gates praised Norway’s contribution to toppling Gadhafi, noting in a 2011 address that, unlike several other members of the alliance who opted out of operations altogether, Norway was “punching above its weight.”
Norway contributed six F-16s to strike missions in Libya. Importantly, it placed very few restrictions on their use and often took on difficult missions other allies were hesitant to carry out. Norwegian aircraft dropped close to 400 bombs in their operations.
More from CNN: Syria problem not going away
Back then, however, the United States could count on the government of former Prime Minster Jens Stoltenberg to support the NATO operation because the anti-Gadhafi forces had U.N. Security Council backing. Like most smaller European Nordic states, Norway takes the imprimatur of the United Nations very seriously. Indeed, the stated position of the now departing center-left government was that Norway could not participate without U.N. backing.
But the new government may have a different view. Solberg has hinted that she believes Norway could back strikes against al-Assad, even without a U.N. mandate. In an interview before the election, she told a leading Norwegian newspaper that it was “not 100 percent certain that you must have a U.N. mandate in order for intervention to be grounded in the rule of law,” while noting that a U.N. mandate was obviously preferable.
To be sure, Norwegian support for strikes would be far from certain – Solberg is still forming a government. And she does not enjoy an absolute majority in parliament – far from it. For strikes, she will need the support of several other parties – and that support could run aground just as British support did. Also, public support for military action in Norway is meager, as in other NATO countries.
Nevertheless, if the latest diplomatic initiative falls short, the White House will need to decide whether or not to go ahead with strikes. In this event, even the possibility of Norwegian support could play a role. Norway will not on its own shift the political calculus in favor of strikes, but it could certainly make a difference if it wanted to.




Syria deal must be backed by force, Hollande tells Amanpour
Coercive force must be on the table in any deal for Syria to give up its chemical weapons, French President Francois Hollande told CNN’s Christiane Amanpour in an exclusive interview on Tuesday in New York.

A resolution that “would not consider any breach” by the Assad regime in destroying its chemical weapons would have “no scope” and “no punch,” he said.

“So France is looking for a resolution that must be binding, enforceable, so that in case of a breach we can go back to the Security Council and allow it to take sanctions,” President Hollande told Amanpour through an interpreter.

President Hollande has given France an unusually active and interventionist role on the world stage.

It was largely France and the United Kingdom that led the charge to intervene in Libya, and at the beginning of this year French troops entered Mali to stop Islamist rebels from taking over that country.

“The role of France is not to apply its ambitions all around the world,” President Hollande said. “We have no intent of influencing or defending commercial or trade interests. What we are fighting for are rules, principles, values.”

Therefore, he told Amanpour, “it is urgent that we act” on Syria.

“Of course it is about fighting the use of chemical weapons, as will be done at the Security Council anytime soon,” he said. “But it is also about finding a political solution.”

Skeptics of the Russian-led deal for Syria to rid itself of chemical weapons say that it is a tacit endorsement of President Assad’s continued rule. President Hollande dismissed this.

“It cannot be an opportunity for Bashar al-Assad to stay as the leader of Syria,” he told Amanpour.

Diplomats are hoping to advance a wider political solution to the fighting in Syria at a second round of talks in Geneva, dubbed in diplo-speak as ‘Geneva II.’

The new, more moderate president of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, has expressed interest in helping to broker a deal in Syria.

Most experienced diplomats agree that no tenable solution is possible in Syria without the participation of Iran, which has wide-ranging influence.

“Iran can attend the conference if that country agrees to the necessity of finding a political solution,” President Hollande said.

The purpose of the conference, he said, is to build a framework under which Bashar al-Assad steps down and a “Syria of tomorrow” is built that represents all political groups.

“If Iran agrees upon that goal, Iran is welcome,” President Hollande told Amanpour. “On the other hand, if Iran wants at any price to keep the regime in place, I cannot imagine how this country could attend Geneva II.”

Iranian President Rouhani has captured the world attention, as he advanced one overture to the West after another, from releasing political prisoners, to wishing Jews a happy Rosh Hashanah, to indeed offering to help broker peace in Syria.

Western officials have been approaching the new leader with cautious optimism, encouraged by his words but anxious for actions on what to them is the key issue: Iran’s nuclear program.

President Hollande was set to meet with President Rouhani when he spoke with Amanpour Tuesday morning. (Amanpour will interview President Rouhani Wednesday evening.)

“When I see him today,” President Hollande said, “I will be telling him a simple thing: If Iran is willing to negotiate to give up its military nuclear program, and get a civilian nuclear program to be accepted, then there is a possible solution.”

“On the other hand,” he continued, “if the deadlock remains, what will happen? More and more sanctions, more burdens for the Iranian economy, and at some point the threat of an operation.”

Despite Iran and Syria being the overriding issues at the U.N. General Assembly, the brazen terrorist attack by al-Shabaab on a shopping mall in Nairobi, Kenya has pulled the world’s attention.

Two French nationals were killed in that attack, President Hollande said, adding that “we stand by all the victims.”

“We have to keep fighting terrorism,” he said. Referring to France’s intervention in Mali, he said, “We showed there that when we have a coordinated action, a resolute action, when we have the support of the African forces for the Sahel, we can succeed.”

He said that he believed al-Shabaab was “on the decline” in Somalia, at it was precisely for this reason that they attacked Kenya, which has “been active” in fighting the terrorist group in Somalia.

Finally, in the midst of huge international stories, German Chancellor Angela Merkel was elected to another term.

“France and Germany have a special responsibility in Europe,” President Hollande said. “Even though we have some different political backgrounds, we certainly want Europe to be at the forefront.”




Israel Cabinet Minister Lapid on Syria, Iran: Words not enough
It may not be Yair Lapid’s job, but he certainly has a lot to say about foreign policy.

“If you want to negotiate you better have a big stick in your hand – or in this case a big Tomahawk,” he told CNN’s Christiane Amanpour of negotiations with Syria on Tuesday. “It’s the Middle East; you have to have sticks with the carrots.”

Lapid, a former journalist and TV presenter, threw a wrench into Israeli politics when his upstart moderate party, Yesh Atid, took second place in the last election.

He is clearly a man with ambitions. He was widely rumored to have wanted the post of foreign minister; he was given finance. Most observers assume he covets the prime minister’s office.

So it’s no surprise that he has plenty to say about some of the top international issues on Israel’s agenda: Syria and Iran.

His views come down to this: Words are great, but we care about deeds.

“Unless there is a credible threat, all the negotiations [on Syria] are just empty words,” he said. “This is not over. It won’t be over until all weapons of mass destruction will be out of Syria. Then we will know this whole move has succeeded.”

Lapid repeated a point many have made about sticking to U.S. President Barack Obama’s “red line” on chemical weapons: That not only Syria, but also Iran has to be shown that the world “will not be silent when regimes and dictatorships are gathering weapons of mass destruction.”

Rhetoric out of Iran has been surprisingly pleasant of late; the new president and foreign minister have taken their message of outreach to twitter, even wishing Jews a happy new year.

“Of course I rather have people tweeting me happy Rosh Hashanah or happy New Year instead of tweeting that they are, I don’t know, holocaust deniers as it was before,” Lapid told Amanpour. “I don’t want to be sour about everything, but is this the real thing?”

Once again, he said, words are great, but it comes down to actions.

“When the reactor in Qom will be closed, when they will stop enriching uranium, when they take off the enriched uranium they already have,” he said, “then we can discuss the fact whether we can all hold hands and sing hallelujah together.”

“I’m happy to listen to any new music coming from Iran,” Lapid said, “but this has to be backed by – not only by words but also by deeds.”

Of face-to-face negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians – orchestrated by U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and thus far very secretive – Lapid put his faith in “low expectations.”

“The best things are happening when we have low expectations,” he said. “The fact that everybody is going around and telling each other, this is not going to work, this is not going to happen, is actually a good thing.”

With such strong views on foreign policy, of course, it’s easy to forget that Lapid’s day-to-day job is stewardship of Israel’s economy.

The issue of the day in Israel is who will lead the Central Bank; Lapid and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu have failed to appoint a permanent leader since the last governor stepped down in June.

“This is a fine example to the fact that comedies are just tragedies in fast-forward,” Lapid said. “We have managed to choose two candidates who turn out to be the wrong candidates and they decided to withdraw, and now it’s going to take a few days or weeks more.”

So who, Amanpour asked, will be put forward to lead the bank?

“This has become the holy grail of all economic reporters in Israel,” Lapid toyed. “It was a nice try.”

Lapid was, however, more open to answer a question that he himself, during his career as a TV personality, was famous for asking.

“What symbolizes Israel for you today?”

“I’m going to choose the corniest answer that everybody gave me, which is my children. … Whenever I look at them, I see the reason why is it that I’m doing what I’m doing,” he told Amanpour. “Everyone’s a bit cynic when he’s in the media. I’m not anymore.”




McCain: "No real way to achieve" diplomatic deal on chemical weapons; some GOP resisting Pres. Obama "because they dislike" him
Senator John McCain (R-AZ) told “New Day” Anchors Chris Cuomo and Kate Bolduan that “there’s no real way to achieve” the diplomatic solution in Syria, America needs to “step up assistance to Free Syrian Army” to get a negotiated departure of Bashar al-Assad and there are some Republicans who are resisting President Obama’s plan “because they dislike” him. On budget and debt ceiling negotiations, Senator McCain urged the President to negotiate and for his colleagues to not shut down the government.
On a diplomatic deal, Senator McCain said, “I think what they are pursuing is a laudable goal, but there’s no real way to achieve it, number one. Number two is that you now give Putin a major place in this whole scenario and in the Middle East.”
“Until you reverse the momentum on the battle field, and Bashar al-Assad thinks he’s going to lose, is the only way you get a negotiated departure of Bashar al-Assad,” Senator McCain said. “As long as he thinks he’s winning, particularly with the assistance that he’s getting from the Russians and the Iranians. As we speak today, there will be a plane load of arms, conventional weapons, landing from Moscow to be used to kill Syrians. At the same time, we are dismantling the chemical weapons stocks. That’s crazy.”




Syria jihadists' hand strengthened by West, rebels say
Western hesitation to support moderate rebels in Syria has strengthened the hand of jihadists among them, giving an increasingly Islamist tint to the rebellion against Bashar al-Assad, rebels in Aleppo say.

They spoke about what led 13 rebel groups, including theirs, to join Al-Qaeda-affiliated Al-Nusra Front Wednesday in rejecting the Western-backed National Coalition and its Syrian Military Council.

A joint statement said the Coalition "does not represent us, nor do we recognise it".

It also called on everyone fighting to topple the Syrian president to unite under a "clear Islamic context that... is based on sharia (Islamic law), making it the sole source of legislation".

That was an apparent reference to the jihadists' aspirations of creating an ultra-conservative Islamic state in Syria.

It has raised fears in the West about an increasing radicalisation of the rebellion and drew a sharp warning from Coalition chief Ahmad Jarba that extremists were trying to "steal our revolution".

The rebellion has always consisted of disparate groups, ranging from a handful of Western-style liberals to mostly moderate Muslims and, again, a small number of jihadists.

Earlier this month, defence consultancy IHS Jane's said the number of hardline Islamists among an estimated 100,000 rebels was nearly half the total.

'It was all lies'

A commander of one of the brigades in Aleppo's Old City placed the blame for the move squarely at US President Barack Obama's feet.

"The United States promised the people of Syria that it would not allow Assad to cross the red line and would attack, but it was all lies," said Abu Ammar, whose brigade is one of the most powerful rebel groups in Syria.

Abu Ammar was referring to Obama's threat to hit Syria over an August 21 chemical weapons attack that killed hundreds of people and that Washington blamed on Assad regime.

He claimed people in Aleppo "have no faith in the international community or the promises of the West, which has led them to ally with Islamists and groups linked to Al-Qaeda".

Part of the change in alliance is purely pragmatic, as it is the jihadists who have given punch to the war effort, says Abu Mohammed, a Sunni Muslim imam who acts as a sort of chaplain to the men of the Liwa al-Tawhid group.

"The United States and the West are... radicalising people. In the face of their indifference, we have begun aligning with Al-Qaeda, because it is they who are fighting and dying for us while the world just looks on."

Rebel fighters have always resented the fact that most of the opposition's political and military leadership lives abroad.

Abu Abeida, a commander of another brigade that signed the declaration, Shabab al-Daraa, said bluntly: "You can't talk about Syria from Turkey. We don't want to have anything to do with politicians who are not inside Syria fighting with us."

Jarba, who spoke at a meeting in New York of the Friends of Syria group, himself took a swipe at the West for its inaction.

Extremism "has increased because of the indifference of the international community, which has failed in its duties to the Syrian people", he said.

The opposition has repeatedly called for arms from its international backers, but the West has been reluctant to deliver for fear that weapons could fall into the hands of extremist groups such as Al-Nusra.

The change of allegiance is also increasingly ideological, these rebels in Aleppo say.

Abu Mohammed claims people have lost interest in creating a secular, democratic state, such as in neighbouring Turkey, and lean increasingly toward a state along Islamic models.

"We need an Islamic state, but not one based on radical Islamism. There are many countries that are religious and where religion is used as the basis of law, such as Saudi Arabia," he said.

There is even a belief among some people that the United States is playing a double game and that, despite its demands that Assad step down, it is actually supporting him.

"The Americans support all the dictators in the Middle East, and if it gets rid of any of them it is just to put a new one in his place," Abu Ammar said.




U.S., Russia make pact on disarming Assad, but the war must end, too
THE CHEMICAL weapons disarmament plan for Syria hammered out in Geneva by Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry is unprecedented. Removing these dangerous weapons in a civil war would be a significant accomplishment. But the joint effort by Russia, the United States and United Nations must not distract from a larger strategy to end the battles of bullets and bombs that have cost 100,000 lives.

The most striking aspect of the agreement, announced Saturday, is its broad scope. Mr. Kerry and Mr. Lavrov committed to liquidating the entire Syrian chemical weapons arsenal and manufacturing complex: production, filling and mixing equipment; full and empty weapons and delivery systems; chemical agents not yet weaponized; precursor chemicals; and material and equipment for research and development. This would make it very difficult — if not impossible — for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to restart a chemical weapons program. Missing, but perhaps obtainable later, are the historical records and plans for the chemical weapons complex, which can be essential in verification.
Syria has pledged to join the Chemical Weapons Convention this week. This normally starts a series of events, beginning with a declaration of weapons stockpiles within 30 days. However, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Lavrov seek extraordinarily fast action for extraordinary times. The agreement calls for the first declaration within a week, completion of on-site inspections and destruction of the production and filling equipment by November and complete elimination in the first half of next year. While the sense of urgency is laudable, the timetable may be unrealistic. Previous attempts to safely destroy chemical weaponshave required years of effort.

The factories of death in Syria probably will have to be destroyed in place, which can be done by filling reactors with concrete, welding tight the plumbing and other methods. The chemicals inside the weapons — the sarin and VX nerve agents, for example — are extremely potent; destroying them will be difficult. The agreement wisely suggests removing these bombs and shells from Syria altogether. Both the United States and Russia have experience destroying them. The remaining agents and precursors that are not in weapons might be neutralized inside Syria by chemical processes that would render them less dangerous. The Kerry-Lavrov agreement includes a commitment to ensure stringent verification, backed up by possible United Nations action if there is cheating.
For all the horror of chemical weapons and the gruesome photographs and videos of the Aug. 21 attack near Damascus, we must not lose sight of the larger suffering in this two-year-old war. United Nations investigators reported Friday that Mr. Assad’s forces are systematically attacking hospitals and denying treatment to the wounded in opposition-controlled areas, just another reminder of the brutality of this conflagration. The United States and Russia, at loggerheads so long over Syria, should put more muscle into ending it.






Obama, ignore the polls on Syria
Most Americans don't want the United States to launch military strikes against the Syrian government. A recent ABC News/Washington Post poll says 59% of the American people oppose such an intervention, while 36% support it. Even more oppose supplying weapons to the Syrian rebels, with 70% against and 27% in favor.
Many have welcomed President Barack Obama's move to bring the decision before Congress as giving the issue the kind of national debate it deserves. And hearings this week may move the needle of public opinion to give the president more confidence that he has the backing of U.S. voters.
But even if that doesn't happen, the president needs to move ahead with the plan to punish the regime of Bashar al-Assad for the use of chemical weapons in an attack outside Damascus -- to degrade its ability to use such weapons of mass destruction in the future and to force its removal and replacement by opposition forces that we support. Such action does not have to involve U.S. boots on the ground. It should not involve putting U.S. lives at risk. But what it will require is a kind of leadership, clarity and commitment that has been sorely lacking from our Syria policy to date.
While leadership often entails persuading others to follow before taking action, sometimes it requires taking action even when it is unpopular because it is the right thing to do.
In fact, setting foreign policy by opinion poll is among the most dangerous traps for a political leader. By nature voters are disinclined to take risks and to intervene in distant conflicts. Given the outcome of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, you can hardly blame them.
In addition, citizens, even earnest ones, are often reluctant -- and sometimes ill-equipped -- to weigh seriously how the outcome of such conflicts might affect America's long-term national security interests. That is not a slam on those citizens. Often the issues involved are arcane, convoluted and mind-bending, even to so-called experts.
Presidents need to take these things into consideration when evaluating just how much weight to give to public opinion. Furthermore, whereas presidents are elected by the people, they are sworn to do what they can not only to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution but also to execute the duties of their office.
This means serving as commander in chief of the armed forces, guiding U.S. foreign policy and working with the tools given to them by elected representatives, such as the War Powers Act of 1973, which grants them the authority to take military action without consulting with Congress if they deem it essential. (They have to consult Congress within 60 days. Although it is worth noting that presidents often undertake such action not by drawing on the power granted them under the act but by that conferred to them under Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution. That's the section giving them the responsibility for being commander in chief.)
The critical issue is whether the national interests of the United States are at risk and must be protected. In the case of Syria, it is clear that the president must act.
The administration has said al-Assad has used chemical weapons. This is an abuse of international law and norms that cannot be allowed to stand, or it will send a message to other bad actors -- some of whom represent a direct threat to U.S. soldiers, private citizens and allies, as is the case in the Koreas, to choose one example. (Iran's WMD threat to allies such as Israel, U.S. friends in the Gulf and U.S. military forces in the region is yet another.) Further, if the United States does not act after the president had rightly declared such action would be unacceptable, it would undermine deeply and perhaps irreparably our credibility in the Middle East and worldwide.
Just as important, the Assad regime is an ally of Iran's, seeking to advance Iranian power throughout the region and doing so with direct Iranian aid and weapons support. This is a threat to our allies, to regional stability and, by extension, to the global economy and vital energy supplies.
Further, the deterioration in Syria has made the country a breeding ground for a new generation of extremists who might be empowered by an al-Assad defeat. We must be careful to place our support behind others, such as the Free Syrian Army, who are most likely to be sympathetic to our views. But we almost recognize that not stabilizing the Syrian crisis, simply ignoring it, will make the situation throughout the region much more dangerous.
We must send a clear message chemical weapons use is unacceptable. And we must actively support the opposition with weapons so that they can defeat al-Assad. Even if the regime that replaces him is hostile to us, it is unlikely to pose the kind of regional threat that one supported by Iran does. Risks are involved. Outcomes may not be exactly what we seek. Action may be dangerous and unpopular, but inaction is certain to make the situation worse and the threats to our interests grow.
The president deserves credit for trying to make this case to the American people. But it is time for him to act whether there is broad support for him or not.





Congress, support Obama on Syria
President Barack Obama has done the right thing by asking Congress to authorize the use of force against Syria to punish President Bashar al-Assad for using chemical weapons on his own people.
I say that even as someone who has been a sharp critic of the administration's Syria policy and an outspoken advocate of intervening in various ways to try to protect the millions of innocent Syrians whose lives are at risk, prevent the conflict from destabilizing the region and support members of the Syrian opposition who share our values.
The president, as he announced in May, is trying to steer this nation back to a world in which we are not permanently at war and we do not turn to our military as the weapon of first resort in any international crisis.
The Framers of our Constitution wanted to ensure that the decision to send our young men and women into battle could not be taken lightly. Both Democratic and Republican presidents have steadily chafed at those restraints over the course of the decades since World War II as traditional wars and formal declarations of war have faded away. George W. Bush's proclamation of a "war on terror," authorized by Congress, put this nation in a state of permanent emergency in which the commander in chief has had extraordinary powers.
That is unhealthy and dangerous for a democracy. A former constitutional law professor, Obama understands that although he has a limited reserve of power that could allow him to act alone, his power will be far greater with Congress. The constitutional framework is designed be a check in the best sense -- to require our leaders to make their case to the American people, to act on the basis of reasoned arguments about the nature of American interests that will stand up far beyond the White House Situation Room.
And the American people should back him on this decision, for three reasons.
First, we are protecting ourselves and our allies. We cannot afford to live in a world in which nations can use chemical weapons with impunity. The taboo against chemical weapons is particularly strong, for good reason. Dying by the breath we need to live holds a particular terror. The parents of the children whose shrouds we see could not protect them even with their own bodies, like human shields from a bullet or a bomb.
The United States stood by when Iraq used chemical weapons first against Iran and later against its own people, to our shame. But we must not make that mistake again. Chemical weapons are the weapons of the weak against the strong, which is why al-Assad, has been driven to use them repeatedly, according to U.S. intelligence, when his back is against the wall, as it is now in Damascus. Should chemical weapons proliferate, they will be the weapons of choice for terrorists.
Second, striking Syria now will be a strike to protect the Syrian people, even if partial and belated. It will not end the massacres carried out with conventional weapons. But weapons of mass destruction are just that: weapons of mass destruction. A chemical attack that kills 1,000 today can kill 10,000 tomorrow and 100,000 the day after that.
Third, the president is asking us to do, as a nation, what a leader has to do. In his 2008 inaugural address, Obama called for a new era of responsibility in this country, "a recognition ... that we have duties to ourselves, our nation and the world." We have those duties not because the United States has some unique role or mission in the world, but because we are the world's most powerful nation. Other nations take their cues from our action or inaction, whether we want them to or not.
If we do not act, we are signaling that the world has suddenly become a far more permissive and dangerous place, that taboos can be broken, and that despite the pious words of the international community, leaders can do whatever they like within their own borders.
If we lead, other nations that take their responsibilities seriously as great powers will join us. A Russian veto may prevent the U.N. Security Council from authorizing our action in advance, but a majority of the members of the council will not vote to condemn the strikes after the fact.
It is now time for Congress to step up to its responsibility. The bargaining has already begun. But the use of force after the use of chemical weapons, with the world watching, is no place for partisan politics as usual.
Unless a clear majority of Congress opposes any action, it is incumbent on all those members who favor some use of force to craft a compromise that gives Obama the power to use both force and diplomacy as president and commander in chief to restore the chemical taboo and do whatever he can to reach a political settlement in Syria.




