Syria 'cooperative' on chemical weapons, OPCW chief says
(CNN) -- The Syrian government is working constructively with the international team overseeing the destruction of the nation's chemical weapons, the chief of the world's chemical weapons watchdog said Wednesday.
Inspectors visited a first site earlier this week, where they saw some chemical weapons equipment destroyed, and are expected to visit more than 20 others over the coming days, said Ahmet Uzumcu, director-general of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
"The cooperation has been quite constructive, and I will say that the Syrian authorities have been cooperative," Uzumcu told reporters at The Hague on Wednesday.
His account comes less than two months after an August 21 chemical attack outside Damascus that led to U.S. and allied calls for military intervention in Syria's civil war -- a confrontation that was defused in mid-September, when Damascus agreed to a U.S.-Russian plan to give up its chemical weapons stockpile.
A U.N. Security Council resolution gives Syria until mid-2014 to destroy that arsenal, which the United States estimated at about 1,000 tons of blister agents and nerve gas. The Syrians provided an initial declaration of its stockpile and must submit a plan for destroying the weapons by October 27, Uzumcu said.
Inspectors must complete their initial inspections of all Syrian chemical weapons and storage facilities by November 1 and complete the eradication of production and chemical mixing facilities, the U.N. resolution states. Uzumcu said inspectors visited a second site Wednesday.
Inspectors face risks in 'dangerous and volatile' Syria
The timeline is tight and the inspectors face significant challenges, including having to cross front lines and move through areas controlled by militants fighting Syria's government. Uzumcu hinted that if the deadlines are to be met, cooperation from rebels would be key.
"I think the elimination of those weapons is in the interest of all. Therefore, if we can assure some cooperation by all parties and if some temporary cease-fires could be established in order to permit our experts to work in a permissive environment, I think our targets could be reached," he said.
U.S. officials said at least 1,400 people died in the August 21 attack, which U.N. inspectors determined had been carried out with the nerve agent sarin. The inspectors did not assign blame for the attack, and Syria denied responsibility, pointing the finger at rebel forces. But Washington and its allies have said that details of the report point squarely at government troops.
And there has been some skepticism over whether Syria will give up its entire arsenal.
A defected Syrian brigadier general, Zaher al-Sakat, told CNN's Christiane Amanpour last week that in addition to four secret locations within Syria, the regime is transferring chemical weapons to Iraq and Lebanon -- an allegation that the commander of the opposition Free Syrian Army, Gen. Salim Idriss, also recently made to Amanpour. Iraq and Lebanon have denied the claims.
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon told the Security Council on Monday that the current inspection team of about 35 will be beefed up to about 100. But he said the inspectors face a "dangerous and volatile" environment, particularly in urban areas such as Damascus, Homs and Aleppo.
"Heavy artillery, air strikes, mortar barrages and the indiscriminate shelling of civilians areas are commonplace and battle lines shift quickly," Ban said.
It will be up to the Syrian government and the United Nations to make sure that inspectors can get to the rebel-held areas, OPCW official Malik Ellahi said Wednesday.
Two more French journalists reported kidnapped
Syria's descent into civil war began in March 2011, when the government of Bashar al-Assad cracked down on anti-government demonstrations in the wake of that year's "Arab Spring" revolts in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and other countries in the region. The United Nations estimated the conflict had claimed more than 100,000 lives before the August 21 attack.
The war has ground on while much of the outside world's attention has been focused on the standoff over chemical weapons, with opposition activists reporting triple-digit death tolls on a daily basis. Syria's government has restricted access by international journalists, making it impossible to verify many of those claims.
France announced Wednesday that two French journalists had been kidnapped in Syria, adding to two others whose abductions were reported earlier this year. The June 22 seizure of reporter Nicolas Henin and freelance photographer Pierre Torres had been kept confidential at the request of their families, the Foreign Ministry said.
The two other French journalists, reporter Didier Francois and photographer Edouard Elias, have been held in Syria since June 6, the ministry said.
The ministry has not said who is holding the journalists, but said "all means of the state are mobilized" to free them.
Henin was preparing a report for the Le Point news magazine and the Arte media chain, and Torres had been expected to cover municipal elections organized for Raqqah, Syria, the ministry said. Francois and Elias, working for French radio station Europe1, had been on their way to the northwestern city of Aleppo when they were captured, the station has said.




Why limited Syria strike could hurt Turkey
Democracy can get in the way of a good war in the Middle East, a reality underscored by the diminishing U.S. public support for intervention in Syria. But the ongoing discussions in Washington over how to respond to Syria’s alleged use of chemical weapons aren’t just being watched closely in Washington and Damascus. In Turkey – Syria’s neighbor and in the vanguard of the struggle against the al-Assad regime – the outcome of deliberations on an attack are critical. Indeed, while the West looks increasingly wary of military action, there are serious concerns in Ankara that Turkey’s security could be put at risk by a U.S.-led strike that is too limited in scope.
Turkey has diligently defended the idea of regime change in Syria prior to the alleged chemical weapons attack. Having rightfully desisted from a unilateral intervention, Turkey has focused its efforts on strengthening the opposition. Ankara has given substantial diplomatic and logistical – as well as more recently military – support to the Syrian rebels. But Ankara’s overt antagonism toward Damascus has started to exact a heavy toll.
Turkey is already host to close to half a million Syrian refugees. This inflow has given rise to social tensions between anti-Assad members of the Syrian coalition and pro-Assad Alawite Turks. Tensions boiled over in May when two car bombs allegedly smuggled in from Syria exploded in the Turkish border city of Reyhanli, killing dozens.
More from GPS: Is Turkey rethinking Syria Kurd issue?
Ankara has found itself stuck providing ongoing support to an ineffective and fragmented Syrian opposition, struggling to stem the rising flow of refugees into Turkey, and rightly concerned about the manifold security repercussions of the ongoing conflict. At the same time, the government’s campaign against al-Assad lacks strong domestic support, with Turkish public opinion remaining cautious about interfering in the internal affairs of other countries. Turkish leaders have also been facing public criticism for the growing gap between their ambitious and antagonistic rhetoric of regime change and their ability to alter the dynamics of the militarized power game in Syria.
Ankara considers the alleged devastating use of chemical weapons by the al-Assad regime as a much-needed game changer and hopes that this tragedy will finally force the international community out of its comfort zone.
Ankara wants the United States to launch a military campaign that will be instrumental in toppling al-Assad. It sees any effective campaign as needing to either decapitate the Syrian regime or at the very least weaken it substantially, so that the opposition can make real inroads toward capturing Damascus. The Turkish government fears that any alternative outcome will lead to al-Assad emerging buoyed and gloating after having survived a U.S. strike.
More from GPS: Turkey's jihadi dilemma
Meanwhile, there are fears that even a limited air strike, if it happens, will only add to “intervention fatigue” in the West. This could end up reducing the likelihood of a more expansive future military campaign in Syria. If this is the case, then al-Assad may become even more brutish. In addition to further raising the humanitarian costs of the conflict al-Assad may also become emboldened enough to act more aggressively against neighboring countries. Turkey would be particularly at risk, having championed outside intervention.
In a recent interview, Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal al-Mekdad claimed that Damascus would strike back not only at Israel, but also at Syria's neighbors Jordan and Turkey if they take part in any U.S.-led operation. Syria is believed to have 600 to 700 Scud-type ballistic missiles. The more advanced versions have a range of about 700 kilometers, meaning they can threaten most of Turkey’s territory and reach its capital, Ankara. They are potentially capable of carrying chemical and biological warheads.
Turkey has no national means to protect itself against such an attack. With NATO assistance, it has acquired six Patriot anti-missile batteries, which are now set up near the Syrian border. But these interceptors have a limited range of just 40 kilometers. Separately, Turkey is protected by NATO’s missile defense umbrella, but the effectiveness of this system, especially against ballistic missiles equipped with chemical warheads, remains unknown. Turkey’s border regions are additionally exposed to attacks by long-range artillery and rocket strikes.
Turkey’s best defense is the deterrence provided by its NATO membership. And Ankara hopes that Syria will resist from attacking Turkey because such an aggression would trigger NATO’s collective defense commitments. Ankara is now eagerly to see how things unfold on Capitol Hill and ultimately President Obama’s decision on how to act having initially backed the high-risk and possibly high-reward option of a comprehensive strike. But for Turkey’s own security interests, a token strike may not be worth a strike at all.





Punishment is not a solution on Syria
President Obama has raised the concept of punishment in defending military intervention in Syria.

There has been much research into the practice of punishment, and we have come a long way in recognizing that punishment is a very ineffective way to change human beings and societies. Yes, it instills fear. And yes, it demonstrates the power of the strong over the weak. But it also creates in the punished a desire for retaliation and a tendency to treat others the way they have been treated.
We may need at times to use force to stop violence, but not for the purpose of punishment.





What not to hit in Syria
Editor’s note: Bilal Y. Saab, a non-resident Middle East scholar at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, is the executive director and head of research of the Institute for Near East and Gulf Military Analysis (INEGMA) North America. The views expressed are the writer’s own.
Pentagon staffers are scratching their heads, at least according to conversations I have had with defense analysts and planners. The president of the United States has asked them to come up with a military plan to strike Syria with apparently no strategic objective in mind, no exit strategy, and no serious blueprint for wider war should the operation go awry. No wonder the U.S. public is so confused and allies in the region are so nervous.
What U.S. President Barack Obama does have is a vague intent to punish Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for using chemical weapons and deter him from using them again. This objective would have been perfectly reasonable and achievable had Obama not also specifically instructed the U.S. military to preserve the al-Assad regime and calibrate the strike so as to avoid any response from al-Assad that could drag the United States into a broader conflict in the Middle East. Talk about threading the needle.
There are numerous unknowns – both domestic and regional – that could shred Obama’s plan to pieces. But there are also some things that are anyway bound to increase the risks of escalation, regardless of how limited Obama wants the strike to be: al-Assad is fighting for his life, which makes him erratic; Syria is a chemical powder keg; al Qaeda’s affiliates are the strongest anti-Assad forces on the battlefield; and the civil war has effectively turned into a regional proxy war, the outcome of which will impact the strategic interests of U.S. adversaries Russia, Iran and Hezbollah.
But don’t waste your time trying to call for a reset of this administration’s approach toward Syria. Obama seems intent on pursuing military action on the cheap to restore some of his credibility vis-à-vis his adversaries. With so little clarity and strategic guidance from the president, it is now solely up to the U.S. military to bail the commander-in-chief out and prevent the worst from happening.
More from CNN: Public against strike resolution
To reduce the chances of things spinning out of control following U.S. military action, Obama has telegraphed his intentions to al-Assad (and to the Syrian president’s allies). The administration even specified to Syria the primary weapon of choice: sea-launched cruise missiles. Rarely in the history of warfare do you see such an unambiguous transfer of critical information specifying end and means from the attacker to the defender. Even traditional arms controllers would be puzzled by the level of transparency that Obama has exhibited. But judged against the president’s stated objective, which is to deliver a shot across the bow, this approach, while bizarre and counterintuitive, has been rational (although al-Assad or his allies could still miscalculate).
So what could a U.S. military strike accomplish? And what are the risks of going after the wrong targets or shooting too hard?
Regime buildings. Obama could punish al-Assad by destroying his Defense or Interior Ministry, Air Force Intelligence Directorate or other key government, military and intelligence facilities. But by now, it is assumed that many of these buildings have been emptied and (at least senior) staffers have relocated. True, the strikes could still degrade the regime’s ability to hold large meetings and coordinate policy and strategy, but destroying the regime’s central facilities carries some risks. For example, such facilities are considered powerful symbols of the regime, and their destruction could leave al-Assad humiliated and tempted to retaliate.
Regime leadership. If U.S. strikes end up killing leading regime figures, the repressive capacity of the Syrian government could be severely damaged. However, the death of relatives and/or close associates could reduce al-Assad’s incentive to head to the negotiating table. After all, the regime is very much a family affair, and al-Assad might react brutally if his hot-tempered brother Maher, who heads both the Republican Guard and the army's elite Fourth Armored Division, is killed. While all regime figures have blood on their hands and should be held accountable for their crimes, some might be more inclined than others to reach a political deal when things start falling apart. Systematic elimination of all Syrian regime figures by the United States would hurt U.S. policy.
Command and control centers. “I like to say that without communications, all I control is my desk, and that is not a very lethal weapon,” U.S. General T.S. Power reportedly said way back in May 1959. In war, the first thing an attacker wants to strike is his opponent’s command, control, communications, and intelligence (C3I) capabilities, with a view to isolating the other side’s forces.
More from GPS: Obama team has mishandled Syria
But if the U.S. military wipes out the C3I network of the Syrian military (most likely it could not with just cruise missiles), there is a real chance of the situation escalating. Under attack and unable to communicate and coordinate with the central leadership, Syrian commanders on the ground could resort to extreme measures if cornered, such as launching chemical weapons. Therefore, if and when the United States strikes, whatever chance of averting escalation to chemical weapon use could depend on the continuous flow of Syrian communications. Finally, widespread destruction of Syrian C3I could reduce the likelihood of early conflict termination if al-Assad strikes back and war erupts, because it would impede transmission of any cease-fire order.
Chemical weapons sites. Given the tremendous risks, it bears repeating that the last target the United States wants to strike is chemical weapons sites. Hitting such targets could cause massive air contamination and lead to the deaths of many of the civilians that the United States is supposed to be trying to defend (cruise missiles, while highly accurate, do not have the incendiary capability to destroy the poisonous substance). This problem is exacerbated by the fact that chemical weapons are in some cases believed to be stored close to densely populated areas.
So what is left for the United States to hit? Given the president’s limited operational aim, the most logical targets to go after should be purely military in nature. If Obama wants to achieve deterrence by denial, he has to degrade al-Assad’s ability to use chemical weapons (something noted in the latest Senate resolution on Syria). The targets for such a mission are the delivery systems his regime has available, such as aircraft, artillery, rockets, missiles and ground transportation vehicles.
The problem is that effective destruction of delivery systems would require a more comprehensive military campaign, and a maximalist objective, which is the defeat or surrender of al-Assad’s army, something not currently in the cards. True, Obama could target al-Assad’s land forces, including tank units, armored brigades, supply depots and possibly some nodes in its sophisticated but redundant air defense system. But absent clear strategic guidance, effective targeting and tactical military action becomes extremely challenging.
Ultimately, there is no way to know for sure whether al-Assad will be deterred in the future, how he prizes his military assets, and how much he is willing to absorb the hits without hitting back in some fashion. By now we know that he wants to survive and cling to power, and so the fact that his choices are even worse than those confronting the Obama administration might be of some comfort to the United States.
Still, when the U.S. is confronted by a foe whose behavior has caused the death of more than 100,000 of his own people and the displacement of millions, it is hard to be confident exactly what he might do next.




Rubio: Assad falling could trigger another civil war
Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has made it clear for the last two years that inaction in Syria is a bad idea.

Because the U.S. chose to "lead from behind," and didn't help moderates overthrow a weaker President Bashar al-Assad early in the rebellion, it now has no good options for a military intervention, Rubio said in an interview with CNN's Jake Tapper.

"The ideal outcome in Syria is one in which Assad falls, and is replaced by a stable, moderate government," said Rubio. "That may no longer be possible."

Assad leaving could instead trigger chaos, said the Florida senator.

"The large number of radical Islamists who now find themselves in Syria means that if Assad were to fall – if he stays in power, that's obviously bad, because it empowers Iran, and so forth – but if he falls, it's also possible it could trigger a second civil war," said Rubio.

"We are really in a bind here, and again, directly the result of the president's mishandling of this entire situation," said Rubio.

Secretary of State John Kerry has stated he believes Syrian rebels and moderates on the ground are doing better.

"He's going to try and make that case in a closed hearing, so we'll hear him out. But I have serious reservations about whether that is true," said Rubio.

Republican senators Ted Cruz and Rand Paul, who like Rubio won their Senate seats with the support of the tea party, are decidedly against a strike.

"U.S. military force is justified only to protect the vital national security interests of the United States," Cruz told reporters Saturday.

"I haven't had one person come up to me and say they're for this war. Not one person," Paul said at Tuesday's Senate hearing.

Few tea party members support a U.S. strike on Syria.

"Military intervention is one of the tools in the toolbox of our foreign policy," said Rubio, adding that his concern is there is "no military intervention at this stage" that could lead to an outcome favorable to America's national security interests.

The strike currently proposed by the administration is meant to prevent Assad from using chemical weapons in the future.

"Assad is using these weapons because he's trying to survive. ... I don't think three days worth of missile strikes is going to dissuade him from doing whatever it takes to survive in the future," said Rubio.




Assad insists rebels, not his government, used chemical weapons
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad again accused rebel fighters of using chemical weapons and said his government had handed over proof to Russia to present to the U.N. Security Council.

“In one word, we didn’t use any chemical weapons,” Assad said in an interview with Fox News that was conducted Tuesday and broadcast Wednesday. The sarin nerve agent that U.N. investigators have said was used in an Aug. 21 attack east of Damascus is called “kitchen gas,” Assad said. “You know why? Because anyone can make it in his house.”
Although he called for further U.N. investigation of last month’s attack and earlier incidents in which he said rebels had used poison gas, Assad confirmed that his government possesses chemical weapons and has agreed to surrender them to international control and destruction.

Assad said he thinks that it would take about one year to assemble and destroy the weapons and that it would cost about $1 billion. But he said the details were up to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Hague-based implementing agency for the international treaty on chemical weapons.

Syria’s agreement, he said, was not the result of President Obama’s threat to use military force but an independent decision in response to a proposal from Russia, Assad’s main military and diplomatic patron.

“The American threat wasn’t about handing over the chemical arsenal, it was about attacking so as not to use it again,” Assad said. “Syria has never obeyed any threat.”

The interview came as the United States and Russia, which agreed last week on a framework for dismantling Syria’s chemical arsenal, disagreed on several aspects of the deal, including its enforcement.
Although the two sides proposed a Security Council resolution to enshrine the terms of the deal, they now appear at odds over whether they preapproved punishment for Syria if it does not comply.

Little progress was made Wednesday in closed-door U.N. meetings, at which the five permanent council members have been discussing a draft proposed by three of them — the United States, France and Britain — according to diplomats involved in the process.

Russia and China, which have united in the past to veto resolutions on Syria, have rejected any reference in the resolution to Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter, a provision that allows a wide range of enforcement actions, including the use of military force.

Rather than pre-suppose a Syrian compliance failure, Russia has argued, any discussion of punishment should take place only if and when such a failure occurs, according to diplomats who spoke on the condition of anonymity about the private discussions.

The framework agreement that Secretary of State John F. Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov reached last weekend is ambiguous on the question, saying that “in the event of non-
compliance . . . the U.N. Security Council should impose measures under Chapter VII of the UN Charter.”

Kerry said Tuesday that Syrian disarmament would happen “only with the United Nations passing a strong resolution. . . . It is important that the threat of force stay on the table in order to guarantee [Syrian] compliance,” he said. “So we will continue to press this issue.”

In the Fox interview, Assad indicated that a U.N. resolution was immaterial to Syria’s decision. “Whether they have Chapter 7 or don’t have, this is politics between the great countries,” he said. “We obey [the Chemical Weapons Convention] because we want to obey.”

Kerry and Lavrov said in the agreement that they “expect” Syria to turn over a complete listing of its chemical weapons by Saturday, a reference that the State Department said Wednesday referred to a “timeline,” rather than a “deadline.”

The Syrian list is to be turned over to the OPCW, which is then supposed to develop and approve a process to take control of the Syrian arsenal and, ultimately, destroy it.

Assad said the timing is up to the OPCW. “Time is not our problem. The problem is organization,” he said. “The only thing we have to do is to provide the information and make [chemical sites] accessible. . . . No problem. We could do it tomorrow.”

On related matters, Assad said the number of deaths in Syria’s ongoing civil war — more than 100,000 by U.N. estimates — has totaled about 30,000 to 40,000. He also said that up to 90 percent of rebel forces are backed by al-
Qaeda, compared with U.S. estimates of about 10 percent.

Asked whether he plans to be a candidate in Syrian elections scheduled for next year, Assad said he has made no decision.




Russia’s Lavrov continues to insist sarin attack probably carried out by Syria rebels
U.N. inspectors found rockets armed with sarin were used against civilians but didn't say who was responsible. Russia still insists rebels could have done it.
MOSCOW — Despite a U.S.-Russia negotiated agreement for the Syrian government to surrender its chemical weapons, Russia did not budge Tuesday from its assertion that the Aug. 21 sarin attack near Damascus was probably carried out by rebels.

Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said, after a meeting here with his French counterpart, Laurent Fabius, “We have very serious reasons to believe that this was an act of provocation.” He said the ability of the U.N. Security Council to direct an “unbiased, impartial and professional” investigation of the attack will be an “acid test.”
His comments came a day after U.N. inspectors said they had found “clear and convincing evidence” that large quantities of the nerve gas sarin were used last month in Syria.

The inspection report presented to the U.N. Security Council on Monday does not assess blame for the attack. But the report’s underlying evidence, including the trajectory of ­poison-filled rockets, was cited by the United States and its Western allies as proof of the Syrian government’s responsibility.

On Tuesday, Fabius strongly disagreed with Lavrov’s contention. The work carried out by U.N. inspectors proves that the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is responsible for the attack, he said.

Lavrov said the discovery of Cyrillic lettering on one of the rockets that delivered the gas was not significant. He suggested that other nations, including some in the West, have been counterfeiting old Soviet weaponry, and he called on them to stop doing so.

The Soviets are widely believed to have sponsored Syria’s original chemical weapons program.

Later Tuesday, Human Rights Watch said that it had tracked the trajectory points released in the U.N. report and that they indicate the Republican Guard 104th Brigade base in Damascus as a potential launch site. The base is located in the foothills of the Qudsiya mountains, next to the Syrian Center for Scientific Research Study, long the subject of Western sanctions because of its alleged role in Syria’s chemical weapons program.

The rockets have a range that allows for them to have been fired from the Republican Guard base, but they could also have been launched from other points on the plotted trajectory, said Peter Bouckaert, emergencies director at Human Rights Watch.
Their disagreement aside, the two foreign ministers were in accord over the need to work out a Security Council resolution on the disposal of Syria’s chemical arms, and on the need to find a way to start a new round of peace talks along the lines suggested by Russia and the United States this past spring.

But Lavrov made it clear that Russia will veto any resolution that countenances the use of force in case of Syrian violations. Such a resolution would fall under Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter, which allows the international body to approve military action — something Russia has adamantly refused to allow regarding Syria.





Zakaria: Al-Assad overthrow would likely mean bloodbath
CNN speaks with Fareed and Sebastian Junger, journalist and author of ‘War,’ about Syria’s civil war and whether U.S. military intervention is the best response to its alleged use of chemical weapons.
Sebastian, you wrote a very provocative, important article in the Washington Post. Referring to Syria you wrote "At some point pacifism becomes part of the machinery of death and isolationism becomes a form of genocide. It's not a matter of how we're going to explain this to the Syrians. It's a matter of how we're going to explain this to our kids." 
You're saying that war actually may be the answer to what's going on in Syria right now. Explain.
My first war was in Bosnia and every war that I've covered since then has been ended or drastically reduced by U.S. military action, by NATO military action. I think a true anti-war position doesn't just mean ignoring a civil war like we did in Rwanda. It means eventually after all diplomatic efforts have failed to use military threat and eventually military action. In Bosnia, a two-week NATO campaign ended a genocide. Amazingly, in the United States, the only people I knew who are against that were my fellow liberals and pacifists who thought that there was never a reason to use violence. And I think that's wrong. Certainly looking back on World War II, imagine had we not entered that war what the results would have been for the world.
And you speak as a war correspondent. Fareed, what do you think about that?
Zakaria: I think the question really is it's not enough to be outraged by what's happening in Syria, because there's all the reason in the world to be outraged, but how would an American military intervention stop the suffering?
As I can see it, American military intervention, even if it is successful, would depose Assad. We know what would happen. Assad and the Alawites and supporters of that regime would fight back as insurgents, as guerillas. That would be phase two of the civil war in which the Sunni militias that are currently opposed to Assad would go on a rampage and slaughter the Alawites and their supporters. And then there would be infighting among them.
We've seen this movie before. This is exactly what happened in Iraq. So I'm perplexed by Sebastian's point that American military intervention has always stopped and solved wars. I'm thinking of Iraq and Afghanistan, I'm even thinking of Vietnam – you can think of lots of cases. We can always pick one's history to prove one's point, but let's stick with this particular case.
More from GPS: Obama has lost control over Syria policy
If the United States deposes Assad, if anyone could explain to me how the civil war in Syria, which is really a deep sectarian struggle, would end, I'd be much more comfortable with it. I think what is more likely to happen is, frankly, it would escalate and you would then have a bloodbath between the two sides with the Assad regime fighting back as guerillas and insurgents, the Sunni militias each trying to take power and simultaneously rid the country of the Alawites. It strikes me as a fairly messy situation.
Junger: Well, I was speaking very specifically about civil wars that we intervened in. I was completely against invading Iraq. These humanitarian crises started in the '90s after the fall of the Berlin wall. And we did end war after war – Sierra Leone, Liberia. It was pretty amazing how effective NATO was.
In terms of Syria, our president is not saying that we're going to intervene to end the war and depose Assad. In fact, he's specifically saying that he's not trying to do that. His point, as I understand it, is that when weapons of mass destruction are used against citizens, against civilians, it's contrary to humanitarian law, it's a crime against humanity. And if we let this pass, in some sense it's not even about the Syrians, it's about the future of the world. If this passes, the next time someone does this it might be even worse. Then we have to draw a line that there are certain crimes against humanity that cannot occur without some kind of consequence for the government that perpetrates them.
Zakaria: Sebastian, I agree with you. I agree with what the presidents doing.
Go ahead.
I agree with what the president is doing and I very much support the idea of taking the chemical weapons out. All I'm pointing out is it won't end the civil war.
Junger: I don't think anyone is suggesting it will.
I'm sure they are hiding some of these. But I still hold out hope for the deal.
Here's why. If you are concerned about these chemical weapons and the precedent it sets and the dangers, and I think Sebastian and I both agree that this is a real problem, then anything we can do to secure some large part of this arsenal and potentially destroy it is a good thing. Remember, the military strikes don't do that. The military strikes are purely punishment. You don't ever attack a chemical weapons depot because that would actually release the toxins into the atmosphere.
So the negotiated strategy with the threat of force of actually securing them is a more effective way of actually dealing with the problem of chemical weapons. We won't get 100 percent of that. I'm absolutely sure the Syrians will cheat. But if you look at the Iraq example, the inspectors actually got most of the chemical weapons out of Iraq, which is why when we invaded, we found nothing in there.
I believe that the threat of military force does act to coerce people into good behavior. It's why police carry guns. But I think if you're going to do that, by the same token, you also have to reward good behavior. And if the Iranians are asking for a negotiation, as long as this country and the world community is very, very strict about what they deem acceptable behavior, I think you have to sort of take it on good faith that at least it's the start of a dialogue.




A smarter way to stop Syria WMD attacks
Editor’s note: Ben Connable is a senior international policy analyst, Jonah Blank is a senior political scientist and Austin long is political scientist at the nonprofit, nonpartisan RAND Corporation. The views expressed are their own.
President Barack Obama made a strong case that the United States should take the lead in punishing the Syrian regime for its use of chemical weapons and actively enforce the near-global ban on these weapons. Now, the possibility of a diplomatic solution to this problem – and the concurrent pause in action – offers an opportunity to alter and improve the request for the authorization of force currently before Congress.
Improving authorization is not simply about punishing Syria over its alleged use of chemical weapons – it would actually be a deterrent rather than punitive, and would encompass all uses of chemical weapons in Syria by any group, including the opposition. This revised approach would reinforce the credibility of U.S. diplomatic efforts without necessitating a limited military strike that would likely derail a diplomatic solution. And it would also recognize the muddled history of constrained military action against dictatorships.
A recent RAND report, Airpower Options for Syria, showed that a limited attack would not go far in protecting Syrian civilians, and that removing even a large portion of Bashar al-Assad’s chemical weapon capability could not prevent the further use of sarin or another chemical agent. A limited strike would constitute an act of intimidation, but it would not necessarily establish a globally recognized red line precluding the use of chemical weapons by other states and nonstate actors.
True, concerted air campaigns can influence opponents to alter their decision-making or help coerce them into submission. But the historical record suggests that limited military intimidation strikes rarely achieve goals of deterrence or improved security – and they often generate unpleasant asymmetric responses.
More from GPS: Why America can't shape Syria
Pundits have compared the proposed strike in Syria to 1998’s Operation Desert Fox, a limited coalition strike against Iraqi WMD activities and other military targets. But the fact is that although Desert Fox might have convinced Saddam Hussein to end his WMD program, it may also have prompted him to accelerate his missile and rocket programs. Either way, the operation did not end the repression of the Iraqi people, and there is no guarantee that limited U.S. strikes would lead al-Assad to comprehensively and safely dismantle his WMD programs.
Indeed, our colleague, Brian Michael Jenkins, recently noted the historical failure of limited strikes to deter dictators who attack their own populations or to hasten regime change – strikes against Serbia in 1999, Libya in 1986, Iran in 1987, Iraq in 1993 and 1996, and against suspected al Qaeda training and chemical weapon sites in 1998, met with either questionable success or failed to achieve their intended objectives altogether.
For example, Moammar Gadhafi responded to the 1986 attack on Libya by bombing Pan Am Flight 103 and shipping weapons to terrorist groups. Al Qaeda and its affiliates, meanwhile, went on to attack the United States on 9/11 and to employ chlorine gas against coalition and civilian targets in Iraq.
Perhaps most tellingly, though, the full-scale 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq, Syria’s immediate neighbor, in response to perceived violations of international rules on WMD did not deter al-Assad from using chemical weapons against civilians in 2013.
More from GPS: How Saudi Arabia is pushing for war
Still, although a rapid surprise attack on the Syrian regime would probably have been more effective than a delayed and highly visible action, continuing to pursue a “yes” vote in Congress may help the president sustain U.S. diplomatic and popular credibility. It also affords the opportunity to consider new approaches.
Instead of asking for authorization to strike Syria specifically for its alleged August 21 chemical attack, for example, he could ask for authorization to conduct punitive strikes as a deterrent against the future use of chemical weapons. He could then opt to strike only in the event of additional attacks.
President Obama could go further and broaden his request to include authority to strike any actor in Syria who uses chemical weapons, including extremist groups and elements associated with the Free Syrian Army. A comprehensive policy that punishes any use of chemical, biological, or radiological weapons would also improve U.S. leverage over the hundreds of disparate Syrian opposition groups. This enhanced scope would demonstrate a broader, global U.S. position against the use of chemical weapons.
Prior to the alleged chemical attacks last month, the U.S. had taken a long-game approach to the Syrian problem, an approach that recognized that there were few, if any, good policy options. So it remains today. But the climate of heightened uncertainty and difficulty in gaining support for limited strikes present the U.S. with the opportunity to craft a more effective version of this long-term regional strategy in support of global objectives.
This strategy can emphasize and reinforce the indirect — or at least less overt — elements of the long game. Reinforced by the credible threat of an unbiased, deterrent strike option, such a strategy could better support U.S. policy objectives than taking action right now.




Not the Time for Big Sticks

Obama should hold the bravado and respond reasonably to Iran's conciliatory signals
When the Obama administration was selling the case for military action against Syria, it used every argument it could come up with, from preserving international norms to preventing another Holocaust. Most of these were exaggerations or bad history, but one could have dangerous consequences for U.S. foreign policy.

Almost every senior U.S. official--President Obama, John Kerry, Chuck Hagel--asserted in some way that we had to act militarily in Syria to preserve U.S. credibility with Iran. There is a mountain of scholarship in international relations that has carefully examined the notion of maintaining credibility--and most of it concludes that there is little gain in doing something simply to maintain credibility. Countries know that circumstances differ wildly in international relations and that what you might do in one situation says very little about what you might do in another, different situation. You really don't need to attack country A to let country B know that you're a tough guy.

What credibility did the U.S. gain by invading Iraq and then persisting in the mission when it was falling apart? What credibility did it gain by escalating with troops and money in Vietnam, largely because of concerns about reputation? If Washington uses careless rhetoric, the solution is not to follow up with careless military action just to be consistent. That does not impress people. It tells them that the U.S. is proud enough to throw good money after bad.

This has been a particularly bad time for Obama officials to thump their chests about credibility because for the past few months, the Iranian government has been sending remarkably conciliatory signals. These started with the election of Hassan Rouhani as President, which was a repudiation not simply of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad but also of the ruling Iranian establishment. During the campaign, Rouhani vigorously attacked the most hard-line candidate in the race, Saeed Jalili--thought to be the favorite of the Supreme Leader--for being unable to come to an agreement with the international community and ease any of the sanctions arrayed against Iran. "It is good to have centrifuges running, provided people's lives and livelihoods are also running," he said in a debate, to great applause.

Since his election, Rouhani has been sending conciliatory signals every few days. He has exchanged letters with Obama. A Sept. 4 tweet from a Twitter account said to belong to the Iranian President wished Jews everywhere a blessed New Year. He announced that the Foreign Ministry would take charge of the nuclear negotiations, wresting them from the more hard-line national-security council. He spoke of the importance of flexibility in negotiations with the West and transparency in Iran's nuclear program, which means he would be willing to allow in international inspectors. Germany's Der Spiegel has reported that he is prepared to shut down the Fordow nuclear-enrichment plant altogether in return for a relaxation of sanctions.
Of course, Rouhani is not the man actually running the country; that's the Supreme Leader, Ayatullah Ali Khamenei, who is deeply anti-Western and anti-American. But he is also a smart and sophisticated politician who wants to stay in power by limiting internal discontent. And so, on Sept. 17, Khamenei said Iran would engage in "heroic leniency" to try to come to an agreement with the international community. He also affirmed, "We do not believe in nuclear weapons because of our beliefs, not for the sake of the U.S. or other countries, and when we say that no country should possess nuclear weapons, we ourselves are definitely not trying to possess them."

Now of course this could all be camouflage and smoke screen. But there is another possibility. The international sanctions against Iran are hurting the country badly. Tehran's support for Bashar Assad's brutal regime in Syria is costing Iran money and arms every month and has tarnished its legitimacy at home. The Arab Spring, for all its problems, has put the spotlight on Iran's Supreme Leader, who has been in power for 24 years. One of the chants heard in Tehran two years ago was "Mubarak, Ben Ali, now it's time for Sayyid Ali [Khamenei]." In these circumstances, defusing some tensions, easing the sanctions and reviving the economy would be extremely useful to the regime in Tehran.

At the very least, the Obama Administration should come up with a reasonable offer that would signal to the Iranian people that if the regime is willing to credibly forswear nuclear weapons, ordinary Iranians will have a brighter future. But it is difficult to sound reasonable while you are beating the drums of war.




Syrian rebels killed or kidnapped hundreds of civilians, report says
Jihadi-led rebel fighters in Syria killed at least 190 civilians and abducted more than 200 during an offensive against pro-regime villages, committing a war crime, an international human rights group said Friday.

The Aug. 4 attacks on unarmed civilians in more than a dozen villages in the coastal province of Latakia were systematic and could even amount to a crime against humanity, Human Rights Watch said in a 105-page report based on a visit to the area a month later.

Witnesses said rebels went house to house, in some cases executing entire families and in other cases killing men and taking women and children hostages. The villagers belong to the minority Alawite sect, an offshoot of Shiite Islam which forms the backbone of President Bashar Assad's regime -- and which Sunni Muslim extremists consider heretics.

One survivor, Hassan Shebli, said he fled as rebels approached his village of Barouda at dawn, but was forced to leave behind his wife, who was unable to walk without crutches, and his 23-year-old son, who is completely paralyzed.

When Shebli returned days later, after government forces retook the village, he found his wife and son buried near the house and bullet holes and blood splatters in the bedroom, the New York-based group said.

The findings are bound to feed mounting Western unease about the tactics of some of those trying to topple Assad and about the growing role of jihadi rebels, including foreign fighters linked to al-Qaida.

U.N. war crimes investigators have accused both sides in Syria's civil war, now in its third year, of wrongdoing, though they said earlier this year that the scale and intensity of rebel abuses hasn't reached that of the regime.

The new allegations of rebel abuses come at a time when the regime is regaining some international legitimacy because of its apparent cooperation with an internationally mandated program to destroy Syria's chemical weapons stockpile by mid-2014.

Lama Fakih of Human Rights Watch said the rebel abuses in Latakia "certainly amount to war crimes," and may even rise to the level of crimes against humanity.

The group said more than 20 rebel groups participated in the Latakia offensive.

Five groups, including two linked to Al Qaeda and others with jihadi leanings, led the campaign, which appeared to have been funded in part by private donations raised in the Persian Gulf, the report said.

Human Rights Watch appealed to the Gulf states to crack down on such money transfers. It also urged Turkey, a rear base for many rebel groups, to prosecute those linked to war crimes and restrict the flow of weapons and fighters. The Western-backed Syrian opposition must cut ties with the groups that led the Latakia offensive, the report said.

Most of the alleged attacks on civilians occurred on Aug. 4, said the group. The campaign began with rebel fighters seizing three regime posts and then the villages. After the regime positions fell, no pro-government troops were left in the Alawite villages. It took government forces two weeks to recapture all the villages.

Human Rights Watch said at least 67 of the 190 civilians slain by the rebels were killed at close range or while trying to flee. There are signs that most of the others were also killed intentionally or indiscriminately, but more investigation is needed, the group said.

The rebels seized more than 200 civilians from the Alawite villages, most of them women and children, and demanded to trade the hostages for prisoners held by the regime.

The HRW report said the rebel groups that led the offensive included Jabhat al-Nusra and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, both linked to Al Qaeda; Ahrar al-Sham; Jaish al-Muhajireen wal-Ansar; and Suqqor al-Izz.




Human Rights Watch: Syrian rebels committed war crimes, killed civilians in planned attack
Jihadi-led rebel fighters in Syria killed at least 190 civilians and abducted more than 200 during an offensive against pro-regime villages, committing a war crime, an international human rights group said Friday.

The Aug. 4 attacks on unarmed civilians in more than a dozen villages in the coastal province of Latakia were systematic and could even amount to a crime against humanity, Human Rights Watch said in a 105-page report based on a visit to the area a month later.

Witnesses said rebels went house to house, in some cases executing entire families and in other cases killing men and taking women and children hostages. The villagers belong to the minority Alawite sect, an offshoot of Shiite Islam which forms the backbone of President Bashar Assad's regime — and which Sunni Muslim extremists consider heretics.

One survivor, Hassan Shebli, said he fled as rebels approached his village of Barouda at dawn, but was forced to leave behind his wife, who was unable to walk without crutches, and his 23-year-old son, who is completely paralyzed.

When Shebli returned days later, after government forces retook the village, he found his wife and son buried near the house and bullet holes and blood splatters in the bedroom, the New York-based group said.

The findings are bound to feed mounting Western unease about the tactics of some of those trying to topple Assad and about the growing role of jihadi rebels, including foreign fighters linked to al-Qaida.

U.N. war crimes investigators have accused both sides in Syria's civil war, now in its third year, of wrongdoing, though they said earlier this year that the scale and intensity of rebel abuses hasn't reached that of the regime.

The new allegations of rebel abuses come at a time when the regime is regaining some international legitimacy because of its apparent cooperation with an internationally mandated program to destroy Syria's chemical weapons stockpile by mid-2014.

Lama Fakih of Human Rights Watch said the rebel abuses in Latakia "certainly amount to war crimes," and may even rise to the level of crimes against humanity.

The group said more than 20 rebel groups participated in the Latakia offensive.

Five groups, including two linked to al-Qaida and others with jihadi leanings, led the campaign, which appeared to have been funded in part by private donations raised in the Persian Gulf, the report said.

Human Rights Watch appealed to the Gulf states to crack down on such money transfers. It also urged Turkey, a rear base for many rebel groups, to prosecute those linked to war crimes and restrict the flow of weapons and fighters. The Western-backed Syrian opposition must cut ties with the groups that led the Latakia offensive, the report said.

Most of the alleged attacks on civilians occurred on Aug. 4, said the group. The campaign began with rebel fighters seizing three regime posts and then the villages. After the regime positions fell, no pro-government troops were left in the Alawite villages. It took government forces two weeks to recapture all the villages.

Human Rights Watch said at least 67 of the 190 civilians slain by the rebels were killed at close range or while trying to flee. There are signs that most of the others were also killed intentionally or indiscriminately, but more investigation is needed, the group said.

The rebels seized more than 200 civilians from the Alawite villages, most of them women and children, and demanded to trade the hostages for prisoners held by the regime.

The HRW report said the rebel groups that led the offensive included Jabhat al-Nusra and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, both linked to al-Qaida; Ahrar al-Sham; Jaish al-Muhajireen wal-Ansar; and Suqqor al-Izz.




Syria can only be contained, not extinguished, top former U.S. diplomat Ryan Crocker tells CNN’s Amanpour
The United States has fundamentally misread the uprising and subsequent civil war in Syria, the former American ambassador to that country and one of American’s most experienced Foreign Service officers told CNN’s Christiane Amanpour on Wednesday.

“I think we made a mistake right at the beginning in somehow thinking that Syria was like Egypt, like Tunisia, like Libya,” Ryan Crocker told Amanpour. “You and I know it's not.”

That misreading has lead Crocker to a stark conclusion.

“Assad isn't going anywhere outside of Syria anytime soon, if ever,” he said. “And maybe we're beginning to understand that.”

Crocker is a career diplomat who has served as ambassador to Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Kuwait, Afghanistan and Pakistan.

“The Syrian regime has been ready for this fight since Hama in 1982; very few Americans remember what happened then. You and I do, when up to 10,000 innocent Sunni civilians were murdered by Assad,” he said. “It radicalized the Sunni population and the regime knew that a day of accounting may come. And they've been ready for it for three decades.”

That 1982 revolt in Hama was put down by Bashar al-Assad’s father, Hafez. His response, brutal and merciless, an example to any would-be revolutionaries, was famously dubbed “Hama Rules” by the writer Thomas Friedman.

Bashar al-Assad “is just like the old man,” Crocker told Amanpour. “Maybe not quite as flexible and more doctrinaire, just as ruthless.”

Russia’s proposal to put Syria’s chemical weapons under international control, while unlikely to alter the dynamics of the civil war itself, is a positive development, Crocker said, as is Iran’s backing of such a deal.

“Iran has suffered from chemical weapons,” Crocker said. “They are no fans of them. So pressure from Tehran, pressure from Moscow will be critical in all of this.”

Indeed, he said, even if a deal is not struck, the past week has been a very successful one in the world of international diplomacy.

“Whatever happens next, we have the Russians and Iranians on record as saying that Syria should put its chemical weapons under international control,” he said. “We have Syria acknowledging it has such weapons and it is prepared to do so.”

But Russia’s plan, even if implemented, would almost certainly leave the civil war in a bloody downward spiral. Crocker says he only sees two alternatives for the civil war.

“Either Assad regains control, foot by bloody foot,” he said, “or it settles into some kind of stalemate.”

Only if a stalemate settles in will a diplomatic solution be possible, he opined. In other words, now, in which Assad clearly has the upper hand, is not the time.

“I'm from the West of the United States,” Crocker said. “We have giant forest fires; the one burning now in Yosemite. You can't extinguish them. You can only contain them. That's Syria. We can't extinguish that fight. Neither side is ready. All we can do is try and contain it and keep it from spreading further into Lebanon, into Iraq, into Jordan, into Turkey. That's the best we can do right now and wait for circumstances to change.”




Putin jabs U.S., Obama in op-ed, says Syria strike would be 'act of aggression'
Washington (CNN) -- Hours before the top diplomats from his nation and the United States begin a high-stakes meeting, Russian President Vladimir Putin took to The New York Times to argue against military intervention in Syria and jab his U.S. counterpart.
Using an op-ed "to speak directly to the American people and their political leaders ... at a time of insufficient communication between our societies," Putin made a case much like U.S. President Barack Obama did Tuesday night -- although their arguments could hardly have been more different.
Striking Syria would have many negative ramifications, Putin argued in a piece that went online Wednesday night, including the killing of innocent people, spreading violence around the Middle East, clouding diplomatic efforts to address Iran's nuclear crisis and resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and "unleash(ing) a new wave of terrorism."
READ: Syria: Key developments
Moreover, the Russian leader said such action without the U.N. Security Council's approval "would constitute an act of aggression."
"It could throw the entire system of international law and order out of balance," Putin said.
Contrast this to Obama's assertion that failing to act in Syria opens the door to more chemical weapons attacks in Syria and in other nations -- as well as among terrorist groups -- by giving the impression that the international community won't act in the face of blatant violations on bans of their use.
READ: Putin comments cause a stir
And whereas the U.S. president blamed the August 21 sarin gas attack that U.S. officials estimate killed 1,400 people squarely on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, Putin wrote "there is every reason to believe it was used not by the Syrian army, but by opposition forces to provoke intervention by their powerful foreign patrons, who would be siding with the fundamentalists."
READ: Syria's weapons: Mission impossible?
Calling Syria's ongoing civil war an "internal conflict, fueled by foreign weapons supplied to the opposition," Putin cautioned against siding with an opposition in Syria he says includes "more than enough (al) Qaeda fighters and extremists of all stripes." (He did not mention the fact Russia has long supplied arms to Syria's government, or that U.S. officials have said they are funneling aid only to members of what they call the "moderate opposition.")
The Russian president ended his op-ed -- just after mentioning a "growing trust" between him and his U.S. counterpart -- with a swipe at a remark Obama made Tuesday contending that "with modest effort and risk, we can stop children from being gassed to death and thereby make our own children safer over the long run."
"I believe we should act," Obama said then. "That's what makes America different. That's what makes us exceptional. With humility, but with resolve, let us never lose sight of that essential truth."
Putin challenged the statement, saying, "It is extremely dangerous to encourage people to see themselves as exceptional, whatever the motivation."
"We are all different," the Russian leader concluded, "but when we ask for the Lord's blessings, we must not forget that God created us equal."
Reacting to that remark and Putin's op-ed generally, a senior White House official said Wednesday night "that's all irrelevant."
"He's fully invested in Syria's (chemical weapons) disarmament and that's potentially better than a military strike, which would deter and degrade but wouldn't get rid of all the chemical weapons," the official said.
"(Putin) now owns this," the official added of the Russian plan to have Syria's leadership give up its chemical weapons. "He has fully asserted ownership of it, and he needs to deliver."
All eyes turn to U.S.-Russia talks in Geneva
Putin's piece went online around the time U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry headed to Geneva, Switzerland, to meet with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov.
Their two days of talks will revolve around a Moscow proposal to avert a U.S.-led strike in Syria by having the Syrian government put its chemical weapons stockpile under international control.
In his speech Tuesday, Obama said he was willing to test the seriousness and feasibility of the initiative before resuming his push for congressional authorization for military action, which at the moment appears unlikely to succeed.
Kerry is taking the lead in dealing with the Russians. That includes regular conversations with Lavrov, including Wednesday when the two talked by phone about "their shared objective of having a substantive discussion about the mechanics of identifying, verifying and ultimately destroying Assad's chemical weapons," said a senior State Department official.
"It's too early to tell whether this offer will succeed, and any agreement must verify that the Assad regime keeps its commitments," Obama said in his prime-time address to a war-weary public skeptical of another military venture in the Middle East.
"But this initiative has the potential to remove the threat of chemical weapons without the use of force, particularly because Russia is one of Assad's strongest allies."
Russian officials have submitted a plan to the United States, Russia's Itar-Tass news agency reported Wednesday, citing a Russian diplomatic source.
Yet White House spokesman Jay Carney said that while conversations have taken place, he was unaware of a full, formal proposal.
"I think we're not at the stage of putting down public pieces of paper," he said.
Vladimir Chizhov, Russia's emissary to the European Union, said the plan calls for Syria's chemical weapons to be placed under international supervision -- inside that country initially, at least.
"The ultimate aim is to have these weapons destroyed," Chizhov told CNN's Christiane Amanpour.
He acknowledged the task of gaining control of the weapons and destroying them with a civil war raging in Syria won't be easy, voicing worries about what rebel fighters might do.
Separately, the United States, France, and Britain discussed a U.N. Security Council draft resolution, according to a spokesman for British Prime Minister David Cameron.
How long will window be open?
Ambassadors from the U.N. Security Council's five permanent members -- the United States, Russia, China, Britain and France -- met the same day for less than an hour, a diplomat with knowledge of the meeting said.
While the focus now is on Switzerland, U.N. headquarters in New York is expected to become the focal point early next week when U.N. chemical weapons inspectors deliver their report to the Security Council -- as early as Monday or Tuesday, sources say -- on the August 21 attack in Syria.
In Washington, the debate about what the United States should do in Syria is not over. While Obama has said he wants to give the diplomatic process a chance, he hasn't said how long he'll wait before possibly pushing again for military action.
After his meeting earlier this week with Senate Democrats, Sen. Dick Durbin said the president asked lawmakers "for some time to work things out -- a matter of days into next week." Another Senate Democrat, though, said it could take weeks to determine if diplomatic efforts will pan out.
Members of Congress will watch Kerry's trip closely for a sense of Obama's next move after weeks of beating the drum for military action against Syria.
"If diplomacy fails, he's painted himself into a corner," Sen. Lindsey Graham said after Obama's speech. "The leader of the free world can't say all these things at the end of the day and do nothing."
Senior State Department officials have cautioned that negotiations over the proposed deal may not conclude after the scheduled round of talks in Geneva. The plan would be to take any final deal to the U.N. Security Council to be formalized in a resolution.
Outcome far from certain
While that process unfolds -- if it does successfully -- Obama continued to keep the door open for military action, despite exhortations from Putin that he drop any hint of a threat.
The U.S. president has said any military operation in Syria would be targeted, limited and not involve U.S. ground forces. Its goal would be to degrade al-Assad's ability to use chemical weapons.
Obama has also said any strike would be effective -- saying Tuesday that "the United States military doesn't do pinpricks" -- and he has ordered armed forces to be poised in the region "to keep the pressure on Assad."
U.S.-funded (if not U.S.-made) weapons began flowing to Syrian rebels about two weeks ago, a U.S. official said. Coordinated by the CIA, the supplies include light weapons, ammunition and anti-tank weapons in addition to nonlethal aid the United States has long been providing.
A big question looming over the diplomatic talks is whether any U.N. resolution includes a potential for military action should al-Assad not cooperate. That's something the United States and its allies have favored, while Putin has said his country could veto any measure there that contains such a threat.
CNN Poll: Part of Syria strike opposition is the messenger's fault
Analysts say Kerry, as leader of the U.S. diplomatic efforts, has his work cut out for him.
"I think it's unlikely the Russian government is going to relent on this issue of whether or not it would support the use of force in a security council resolution," said Nicholas Burns, a former senior State Department official now at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government.
"They've been consistent since day one of the Syrian crisis that they did not want to see the United States or anyone else use force. I think that's one of the ambitions the Russians have going into this negotiation in Geneva," he added.
Obama makes case: opinion
Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said in an exclusive interview on CNN's "The Lead with Jake Tapper" that Kerry must not take the threat of force off the table in his talks with the Russians even if they insist he drop it.
"This is the way that diplomacy works. You use the threat of the use of force to get some action in diplomacy, and then diplomacy just to figure out what you do about the threat of the use of force," said Albright, who served as America's top diplomat under President Bill Clinton.
"One of the things I know from trying to get Security Council resolutions is that they take a while," said Albright. "But my personal feeling here is that it is that threat of the use of force, and the president made very clear that our ships would stay in the area, and that the use of force would stay on the table."





Iran president says West will 'regret' any Syria strike
Iranian President Hassan Rowhani warned the West on Sunday that it will "regret" any military intervention in Syria, and called for dialogue to stop the war in its ally.

"Do not seek a new war in the region because you will regret it," Rowhani said in a remarks at a military parade in Tehran addressed to Western governments who have called for military strikes on Syria.

"War cannot be extinguished by war. It must be extinguished by politics and dialogue," he said.

Rowhani made the comments on the eve of his departure for New York to attend the United Nations General Assembly, where the tragedy of Syria's deadly 30-month conflict is to take centre stage.

The Iranian president is due to discuss the conflict with French counterpart Francois Hollande on the sidelines of the annual meeting and could possibly meet US President Barack Obama.

On Sunday, he urged rebels battling to topple the Damascus regime to "sit at the table of negotiations" with the government of President Bashar al-Assad.

The opposition Syrian National Council has dismissed an earlier offer by Rowhani for Iran to mediate.





