Mysterious 'UFO' over Kentucky explained
Google, it is cheekily said, knows everything even, apparently, the origin of an unidentified flying object.

On Oct. 16, 2012, residents of Pike County, Ky., looked high in the sky to find a strange sight. Amateur astronomer Allen Epling described it to a local reporter as looking "like two fluorescent bulbs, side by side, parallel, shining very brightly."

"It would get so bright they would seem to merge, and you could see it very clearly with the naked eye," Epling said. "Then, it would dim down almost invisible ... It wasn't anything I recognized. Definitely not an airplane, and I've never seen a helicopter that looked like that."

Epling wasn't the only one who noticed; police in Kentucky, Virginia and Tennessee got phone calls from concerned citizens. Calls were made to nearby airports, but government officials could shed no light on it. The unidentified flying object, estimated to have reached an altitude of 60,000 feet, remained more or less stationary for hours, suggesting that it was tethered to the ground somehow, or hovering under its own power. [7 Things Most Often Mistaken for UFOs]

And now, the origin of the bright bulbs has been found.

Explanations and speculations
Alien spacecraft were, of course, suspected. The most likely explanation a balloon of some sort was floated, but led to further mystery and shadowy speculation. What entity placed it there, and what was its purpose? Was it spying on unwitting Americans?

Or was it sampling or even creating so-called "chemtrails," those lines in the sky that resemble normal airplane contrails but are suspected of being anything from extraterrestrial signals to mind-control experiments to weather-controlling machinery? Many thought top-secret chemical agents were involved, which raises the question of what possible purpose the chemtrails would serve. As Bob Carroll notes in his book "The Skeptic's Dictionary" (Wiley, 2003), "Any biological or chemical agents released at 25,000 feet or above would be absolutely impossible to control, making any measurement of effects on the ground nearly impossible ... Such an exercise would be pointless, unless you just wanted to pollute the atmosphere."

Besides that, the fact that the U.S. government didn't know or, depending on your point of view, claimed not to know what the object was simply fueled the speculation. Obviously, whatever was that big and high up in the sky was not put there by a hobbyist, and if no one at the Air Force or Pentagon truly knew what it was, perhaps a private company, or maybe even a foreign power, was behind it. The reports and news faded away, but the mysterious object hung like a question mark in the sky.

Secret revealed
Now, an article in Wired magazine has revealed the secret behind the mysterious craft: a Google-financed tech endeavor code-named Project Loon. "The people in Pike County were witnessing a test of Project Loon, a breathtakingly ambitious plan to bring the Internet to a huge swath of as-yet-unconnected humanity via thousands of solar-powered, high-pressure balloons floating some 60,000 feet above Earth," wrote Wired's Steven Levy.

The balloon stayed aloft for 11 days before reaching Canada, Levy reports.

The Project Loon balloons, while providing fodder for UFO websites and conspiracy theorists, travel "on the edge of space, designed to connect people in rural and remote areas, help fill coverage gaps and bring people back online after disasters," according to the project's website. The solar-powered balloons would circle the planet, floating in rings about 12 miles (19 kilometers) above Earth in the stratosphere (about twice the altitude at which commercial airplanes fly). "People connect to the balloon network using a special Internet antenna attached to their building. The signal bounces from balloon to balloon, then to the global Internet back on Earth," the website reads.

The result? Low-cost Internet access.

So the mysterious UFO was, indeed, the result of a technologically advanced civilization, but it seems that civilization comes in peace and is here to help us or at least provide affordable Wi-Fi to rural populations.




Dennis Kucinich's UFO Comments Prove He's Nuts
Now I know he's not going to be president, so there is an argument for not giving Dennis Kucinich a kick in the pants. But, with apologies to the congressman in advance, I'm afraid I must.

About 24 hours after Democratic presidential candidate Dennis Kucinich pronounced President Bush crazy for even thinking there might have to be war with Iran, the Ohio congressman was asked if, in fact, while visiting with Shirley MacLaine he had actually seen a UFO.
Remember: This is a guy who feels free to say Bush is crazy one day and admit something the next day that many, if not most, people think proves a person is crazy.

If you've seen UFOs you probably shouldn't go around calling other people nuts. If you admit to seeing a UFO, martians, space creatures, big foot and all the rest, you are by definition on the defensive against a charge of craziness.

The congressman doesn't eat meat. Perhaps that is an explanation.

And the rest of you who have seen UFOs, please don't send angry e-mails. It's not going to make any difference -- I'll still think y'all are crazy.

Oh, and by the way, it isn't just Bush who thinks we might be forced into conflict with Iran. The French president said so publicly at his U.N. speech a couple months ago. And even Muslim states are recognizing this might be reality.

It's bad, but it's not crazy. However, now we know who actually is crazy.

That's My Word.





Denver 'UFO' likely has earthly explanation
An unusual video of mysterious dark objects moving very quickly and erratically over the skies of Denver, Colo., has local residents buzzing.

Fox affiliate KDVR reporter Heidi Hemmat described "an unusual object that appears to launch and land in the metro area." The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had no record of anything unusual in the skies at the time, either visually or on radar.

'The 'UFOs' appear at least several times a week [for months], we are told, usually around noon to 1 PM.'
- Robert Sheaffer, UFO researcher

The video made news last week when KDVR reported:

"Strange objects caught on camera flying over the city and nobody can explain it. We first learned about these sightings when a metro area man, who does not want to be identified, brought us his home video. He captured the images on his digital camera from a hilltop in Federal Heights looking south toward downtown Denver. ... The strangest part is they are flying too fast to see with the naked eye, but when we slowed down the video, several UFOs appear. ... Aviation expert Steve Cowell is a former commercial pilot, instructor and FAA accident prevention counselor. He thought he would have a logical explanation, until he watched the video. 'That is not an airplane, that is not a helicopter, those are not birds, I can't identify it,' he said."

There are many obvious holes in the spacecraft explanation, not the least of which is that it's amazing that no one in Denver apparently noticed the extraterrestrial spacecraft launching and landing in the skies over the downtown area in the middle of the day.

The most likely explanation? A bug or insect, probably a fly or bee.

Assuming that the TV station is not being pranked by the anonymous cameraman, it's not difficult to see how the insects could fool people. It's not necessarily that anyone is stupid or gullible; instead it's an optical illusion created by the camera representing a three-dimensional object in two dimensions.

Cases like this illustrate the difficulty of determining the size of objects when there is nothing nearby to judge scale. The unidentified flying objects can either be interpreted as large and moving very quickly a great distance away, or small, moving more slowly, and close to the camera. The images can look exactly the same.

If you assume that the objects are at a great distance, then they would have to be large, and flying at speeds (and with steering abilities) far beyond anything man-made.

However if you realize that the UFOs look identical to flying insects, the mystery vanishes. And, of course, the FAA tracks aircraft, not insects, which explains why no one saw any trace of them in the skies over Denver.

Skeptical UFO researcher Robert Sheaffer noted that this is not the first time those flying objects had been filmed: "The 'UFOs' appear at least several times a week [for months], we are told, usually around noon to 1 PM. Most flying insects become more active during the warmest part of the day."

This is also not the first time that flying insects caught on video have been mistaken for UFOs. Indeed the Denver bugs look identical to UFOs in a widely-seen video taken in 2010 at the El Bosque Air Force Base in Chile. Earlier this year that case was widely claimed by bestselling UFO author Leslie Kean to be among the best pieces of evidence for UFOs ever captured on video. If Kean is correct, the evidence for extraterrestrials in our skies may be weaker than anyone imagined.

"Strange objects caught on camera flying over the city and nobody can explain it. We first learned about these sightings when a metro area man, who does not want to be identified, brought us his home video. He captured the images on his digital camera from a hilltop in Federal Heights looking south toward downtown Denver. ... The strangest part is they are flying too fast to see with the naked eye, but when we slowed down the video, several UFOs appear. ... Aviation expert Steve Cowell is a former commercial pilot, instructor and FAA accident prevention counselor. He thought he would have a logical explanation, until he watched the video. 'That is not an airplane, that is not a helicopter, those are not birds, I can't identify it,' he said."

Cowell is certainly correct: It is not an airplane nor helicopter, nor birds. He's also right that he can't identify it, though he'd likely have better luck if he was trained as an entomologist instead of an aviation expert.




N.J. UFO Hoaxers Get Fines, Community Service
Two New Jersey men who staged a UFO hoax will have more earthly pursuits, such as picking up trash from the side of the road.

A judge fined Chris Russo of Morris Plains and Joe Rudy of Chester Township $250 each and ordered them to perform 50 hours of community service for creating a disturbance.

Authorities say the pair triggered a flurry of 911 calls when they lit road flares tied to helium balloons and released them in Morris County in January and February.

The men said they did it to debunk so-called UFO experts. They posted details of their exploits on a Web site on April Fools' Day.

The prosecutor charged them with disorderly conduct, saying the balloons could have interfered with air traffic and posed a potential fire hazard.




Norway UFO Was Out-Of-Control Russian Rocket
A spectacular spiral of light was seen over the north of the country on Wednesday, prompting theories it was caused by a meteor, the Northern Lights or even aliens. 

But now Russia has revealed that its latest test-firing of its new intercontinental missile ended in failure — at the same time observers witnessed the early morning light show.

As well as signaling a major setback for the country’s armed forces, the revelation provided a possible explanation for the mysterious display in the skies.

Russia's defense ministry refuses to confirme that the lights were caused by its Bulava missile, which can be equipped with up to 10 individually targeted nuclear warheads and has a maximum range of 5,000 miles.

But defense analyst Pavel Felgenhauer said the images seen over Norway were consistent with a missile failure.

"Such lights and clouds appear from time to time when a missile fails in the upper layers of the atmosphere and have been reported before," he said. "At least this failed test made some nice fireworks for the Norwegians."

The botched launch was the twelfth test of the Bulava and its eighth failure, which deals another blow to Kremlin's hopes that the sea-based weapon would become a cornerstone of its nuclear arsenal.

"They will have to spend quite a long time trying to make it working," said Alexander Konovalov, the head of the Moscow-based Institute of Strategic Assessment. "That is fraught with very negative consequences, up to the loss of the sea-based component of the Russian nuclear forces," he said.

The ministry said that a government commission was looking into the possible reasons behind the test failure.

Technology Web site Gizmodo has created a computer simulation showing how a rocket spiralling out of control could create such a display:




Spiraling 'UFO' was probably a Russian missile
A spiraling ball of light spotted in the night sky above the Middle East Thursday evening was probably a ballistic missile being tested by the Russian military, rather than a visitor from outer space.

The glowing light's smoky, swirling descent was witnessed by people in Israel, Lebanon, Armenia, Turkey, Cyprus, Jordan and other Middle Eastern countries, and footage of the event quickly appeared on YouTube.

According to MSNBC, some witnesses suggested on Twitter that the light was a good omen for Syria's revolution, while others worried it was a bad sign for Syria, potentially signaling the use of chemical weapons. Meanwhile, hundreds of Israelis flooded police hotlines with UFO reports, according to the Israeli news service Ynetnews.

But the light was reminiscent of other glowing spirals that have been observed during ballistic missile tests, such as one sighted over Norway in 2009. That time, the light was caused by a failed test missile that was releasing burning fuel as it spun.

And indeed, later Thursday, the Russian news agency RIA Novosti reported that the "Topol" Intercontinental Ballistic Missile had been successfully test-fired at 9:39 p.m. (Moscow time) from the Astrakhan region in central Russia. Russian sources said the missile "accurately hit its target" in the Kazakh firing range, but Yigal Pat-El, chairman of the Israel Astronomical Association, told Ynetnews that the missile "most likely spun out of control, and its remnants and the fuel was what people saw."

It could be that the Topol missile's spiraling behavior is a feature, not a malfunction, according to NBC News space analyst James Oberg. He said it "may be associated with guidance, or decoy deploy, or enhancing hardness against U.S. boost-phase antimissile weapons."




Deep-sea Baltic UFO hunt turns up mere rocks
A feature on the floor of the Baltic Sea that was discovered last summer by Swedish treasure hunters is making headlines once again. 

The latest media coverage draws upon an hour-long radio interview with Peter Lindberg, head of the Ocean X Team (which made the "discovery"), in which Lindberg delivers a string of cryptic and titillating statements about the "strange" and "mysterious" seafloor object his team has been exploring for a year.

Lindberg discusses various possibilities for what the object might be: "It has these very strange stair formations, and if it is constructed, it must be constructed tens of thousands of years ago before the Ice Age," he said in the radio interview. (The peak of the most recent Ice Age occurred some 20,000 years ago.)

"If this is Atlantis, that would be quite amazing," he said. Atlantis is a mythical underwater city referred to in ancient legends.

Lindberg acknowledges that the object could instead be a natural formation, such as a meteorite that penetrated the ice during the Ice Age, or an underwater volcano; however, he gives the impression that scientists are baffled by it. Geologists, for example, have supposedly told him the object "cannot be a volcano." [Image Album: Baltic Sea 'Anomaly']

'Most of the samples Ocean-X has brought up from the sea bottom are granites and gneisses and sandstones.'
- Volker Brüchert, associate professor of geology

Also adding titillation, Lindberg says a documentary is being made about the seafloor anomaly — the location of which he has not disclosed — and he's saving some juicy details for the footage. "We're not telling everything," he said. "We will reveal some quite interesting things in the documentary."

The divers recently gave samples of stone from the object to Volker Brüchert, an associate professor of geology at Stockholm University. Swedish tabloids quote Brüchert as saying: "I was surprised when I researched the material I found a great black stone that could be a volcanic rock. My hypothesis is that this object, this structure was formed during the Ice Age many thousands of years ago."

In other words, an expert appears to back up their claims that this seafloor object is unexplained, and perhaps is an Atlantis-like ancient building complex. To double check, Life's Little Mysteries consulted that expert. Turns out, neither he, nor any of the other experts contacted about the Baltic Sea object, think there is anything mysterious about it.

"It's good to hear critical voices about this 'Baltic Sea mystery,'" Brüchert wrote in an email. "What has been generously ignored by the Ocean-X team is that most of the samples they have brought up from the sea bottom are granites and gneisses and sandstones."

These, he explains, are exactly what one would expect to see in a glacial basin, which is what the Baltic Sea is — a region carved out by glacial ice long ago.

Along with the mundane rocks, the divers also gave him a single loose piece of basaltic rock, a type of rock that forms from hardened lava. This is out of place on the seafloor, but not unusual. "Because the whole northern Baltic region is so heavily influenced by glacial thawing processes, both the feature and the rock samples are likely to have formed in connection with glacial and postglacial processes," he wrote. "Possibly these rocks were transported there by glaciers."

Glaciers often have rocks embedded in them. At the end of the Ice Age, when glaciers across Northern Europe melted, the rocks inside them dropped to the Earth's surface, leaving rocky deposits all over the place. These are sometimes called glacial erratics or balancing rocks. [Gallery of the Weirdest Balancing Rocks]

Lindberg and the Ocean X Team did not respond to a request for comment on the glacial deposit theory.
Aside from a widely-reproduced illustration recently created by a graphics artist in which the Baltic seafloor object is rendered as a beautiful, Atlantis-like archaeological site, there has only ever been one actual image of the Baltic Sea object: the original sonar scan image captured by the divers last summer, in which the object resembles a crashed UFO spaceship. But experts told us that sonar image should be disregarded.

"The sonar image has numerous artifacts in it that make it difficult to interpret, and I would not place too much confidence in any interpretation until a better processing is done and the details of the type of sonar and particulars are provided," said seabed sonar-scanning expert Dan Fornari, a marine geologist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts. "I'm saying the dataare lacking in resolution, detail and quantification."

The expert analysis suggests this is just a glacial deposit that the Ocean X Team "discovered" in a low-resolution sonar scan. Widespread media coverage, fame and a worldwide Internet following have since ensued. Lindberg laments the fact that no organizations will sponsor his investigation. Some organizations have supposedly told him funding the dives isn't worth their time because the anomaly "might be something very unexplainable." 

He asks people to support his and his fellow divers' work by purchasing apparel from the Ocean X website.




Phoenix 'UFO' revealed as NASA experiment
Earlier this week a mysterious, glowing teardrop-shaped object was seen high in the sky above Phoenix.

WPTV News Channel 5 asked its readers, “What was that floating (sometimes stationary) bright, glowing object hovering over the Valley Monday evening? Did you see it? Some thought it was a UFO, a weather balloon or even an alien spaceship.”

VIDEO: Top 5 UFO Video Hoax Tips

Eventually the National Weather Service was asked about it, and their response poured cold water on conspiracy theories about top-secret military craft and extraterrestrial visitation. The strange sight has nothing to do with UFOs or aliens. Instead it’s a HASP 643N — a High Altitude Student Platform balloon sent up to research things like wind patterns and air quality.

It’s a project of the Columbia Scientific Balloon Facility, which according to its web site, launches large, unmanned, high-altitude research balloons — and recovers the experiments they carry — for NASA and universities around the world.

Though the Columbia balloon facility is located in Palestine, Texas, the former-UFO HASP balloon was launched from Fort Sumner, N.M. — not far from Roswell, site of a famous 1947 crash of either a Cold War spy balloon project or an alien spacecraft — depending on whom you believe.

This is only the latest of many purported UFO reports near or over the city of Phoenix. In late 2011, for example, four bright lights were seen and videotaped during a high school football game in Scottsdale. The strange lights, which were seen by hundreds of people and videotaped by at least two of them, seemed to move slowly in the sky, sometimes blinking randomly.

The entire sighting lasted for about a minute and a half. The video was posted to YouTube, where within days it became one of the top stories on Yahoo News, sparked “a national mystery” and garnered over 50,000 views.

NEWS: Mysterious Kentucky ‘UFO’ Explained

The mystery was soon solved when a local reporter identified the mysterious lights as &gtfour members of a skydiving team, the Arizona Skyhawks, who jumped with bright magnesium flares for a Halloween show.

In 2008, another set of mysterious lights were sighted. Hundreds of Phoenix residents reported four bright red lights in the sky at about 8 p.m. Those turned out to be a hoax created by road flares tied to helium balloons.

Robert Sheaffer, a UFO investigator with “Skeptical Inquirer” magazine and author of the "Bad UFOs” blog, told Discovery News, “It’s remarkable how so many people, when they see lights in the sky, immediately jump to the conclusion that they might be seeing (an alien spacecraft) … In reality there are many different possible explanations for lights in the sky, all of them more likely than alien visitors.”

It’s a good reminder that just because one or more people can’t identify something in the sky doesn’t mean that it’s unknown or unexplainable.

Indeed, there may be more UFO sightings still to come. Another half-dozen HASP balloon launches are slated for this month, and — depending on weather patterns and where you live — may end up in the skies over your hometown.





NASA solves 'UFO' mystery outside International Space Station
It’s an “identified flying object.”

On Monday morning, 220 or so miles about the Earth, NASA astronaut Chris Cassidy looked out the window to see a mysterious object drifting by.

Cassidy reached out to Mission Control about the strange item, which was drifting lazily in the emptiness of space.
According to a narrator on a clip from NASA TV, which shows the object passing near the Progress 52 module attached to the station, it lost the “unidentified” tag.

“Earlier this morning, Chris Cassidy had noted an object that was floating past the station near the station’s Progress 52 cargo ship,” said the NASA TV narrator. “That object has been identified by Russian flight controllers as an antenna cover from the Zvezda service module.”

The Zvezda Service Module was the first fully Russian contribution to the International Space Station and served as the early cornerstone for the first human habitation of the station, according to NASA. It was launched atop a Proton rocket from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.

The module provides station living quarters, life support systems, electrical power distribution, data processing systems, flight control systems and propulsion systems. It also provides a communications system that includes remote command capabilities from ground flight controllers.

Its antenna must be awfully cold.




UK shut down UFO desk after finding no threat: files
Britain's defence ministry shut down its UFO unit four years ago after concluding that extra-terrestrials likely did not exist, and in any case did not pose a threat, previously secret files released Friday showed.

The Ministry of Defence (MoD) closed its hotline in 2009 despite a trebling of reported sightings of Unidentified Flying Objects (UFOs) that year, many of them near national landmarks.

In a briefing for then defence minister Bob Ainsworth, civil servant Carl Mantell said the UFO desk was using up increasing amounts of staff time but had "no valuable defence output".

He wrote in a memo that in more than 50 years, "no UFO sighting reported to (MoD) has ever revealed anything to suggest an extra-terrestrial presence or military threat to the UK".

It added: "The level of resources diverted to this task is increasing in response to a recent upsurge in reported sightings, diverting staff from more valuable defence-related activities."

The National Archives files reveal details of sightings recorded in the two years before the UFO desk was disbanded, including those around the Houses of Parliament and Stonehenge.

Between 2000 to 2007, the MoD received an average of 150 reports a year, but 520 sightings were recorded in the 11 months to November 2009, according to a briefing in the files.

Officials said one possible reason for the surge could have been the trend for releasing Chinese lanterns, which appear like floating lights in the sky.

Many sightings were made in the summer months by people out walking their dogs, having barbecues and, in one case, relaxing in a hot tub.




Drone mistaken for ‘UFO,’ creates panic on DC highway
People in the D.C. area are buzzing after pictures began popping up online showing what many believed to be a 'UFO' in transport along the Capitol Beltway, MyFoxDC reported. 

The spotting took place around 11:00 p.m. Wednesday when drivers first saw the craft being hauled on a flatbed truck on I-270, then on I-495.

Maryland State Police confirmed that the strange craft was actually a drone aircraft made by Northrup Grumman that was being transported from West Virginia to Patuxent Naval Air Station in Maryland.

It wasn't the first time aircraft being transported had been mistaken for 'UFOs'. Last year, residents of Cowley County, Kansas mistook a similar flying machine. 

DefenseTech.org reported last year that engineers practice aircraft carrier take-offs and landings with the drone on a strip of runway at Patuxent that's painted to resemble a carrier's flight deck.




UFOs over China? Not quite, analyst says
Those probably were not UFOs that hovered over China recently, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology analyst said.
The images of the UFOs have caused quite a stir in China and on blogs around the world.
But many of the images appear to be faked with the software program Photoshop and the ones that were not faked seem to depict the launch of a Chinese ballistic missile, said Geoffrey Forden, an MIT weapons analyst.
Forden, who also specializes in Russian and Chinese space systems, published his analysis on a blog called "Arms Control Wonk."
In the analysis, Forden used scientific theories to examine the images of the flying object that he felt were not created with Photoshop.
"It seems to me that a DF-21 (missile) launch somewhere near Jiuquan and aimed at a point somewhere in the eastern Gobi desert is the most likely cause of this 'UFO'", Forden wrote.
Chinese officials have been looking into the reports about UFOs. They have said they were trying to determine whether the objects were private or military aircraft, rocket flares, reflection in the sky or something else.
The first sighting occurred at Hangzhou's Xiaoshan Airport, in the eastern part of the country, according to the state-controlled Xinhua news agency.
Eighteen flights were delayed or rerouted and operations shut down after twinkling lights were spotted above the terminal around 9 p.m. July 7, the agency said. According to Xinhua, speculation has centered on a private aircraft. The state-run China Daily quoted a source saying the object had a military connection.
Purported photos of the unworldly object have appeared online, on YouTube and on television news shows.
Meanwhile, The Shanghai Daily reported a UFO appeared above the city of Chongqing a day later.




NASA debunks mysterious triangular 'UFO'
Once again, alien conspiracy theorists have attempted to use publicly available NASA images to prove that the space agency must be engaging in an elaborate UFO cover-up. And, once again, they've been foiled by the laws of physics.

This time, they called attention to peculiar new footage captured by a telescope onboard NASA's STEREO-B spacecraft — one of a pair of probes parked on either side of the sun which, together, provide a 360-degree view of the inner solar system. The footage shows Venus, Earth and, on the opposite side of the field-of-view, a mysterious triangular object headed our way.

"Comparing it for size to the planetary objects that are seen in this telescope, if my calculations are correct, that thing is enormous," said YouTube user "BeePeeOilDisaster" in his video commentary on the footage, which was captured Dec. 27 -29. Talk of a cover-up quickly followed when, a few days later, NASA scientists updated the STEREO website to display newer images. 
This is not the first time alien hunters have found what they believe to be enormous UFOs in images captured by the STEREO probes. [Mysterious Planet-Size Object Spotted Near Mercury]

But this time, the team of scientists who work with data from the probes decided to address the claim directly. In a post on the STEREO website, the researchers offered up an explanation of the triangular feature in the December footage. The researchers say it's no more than a trick of the light.

"The answer lies on the exact opposite side of the image," the scientists wrote. "At the same time as this strange-looking feature starts being visible, the very bright planet Venus enters the [telescopic camera's] field-of-view from the lower left."

The scientists note that Venus and the triangle, opposite each other across the middle of the camera plane, stay in step as they move. "This is not a coincidence. The strange-looking geometrical 'object' is actually an internal reflection of the planet Venus within the telescope optics. This effect has been seen many times before."

In this optical effect, incoming light reflects back and forth off lenses and mirrors inside the telescope; the shape of artifacts produced by this scattered light — usually triangles and circles of various sizes — depends on the relative orientations of those lenses and mirrors. 

Another example of internal reflection, this time of light from planet Earth, can be seen in a STEREO-B image from May 2007 . More examples of internal reflection and other optical and data-processing artifacts are displayed on the scientists' "Image Artifacts" Web page, along with explanations of the various effects.




'UFO' Lights Up Brazil Skies
A UFO spied in the skies over Sao Paulo has all of Brazil buzzing.

The amateur footage, shown on Brazilian TV station G1, shows blurry footage of a disc-shaped object hovering in the clouds for a minute or so -- before disappearing in a bright flash of light, followed by a trail of colorful bursts.

But is it an alien visitation, or merely the latest in a storied tradition of forgeries?

G1's anchors explain that two passersby saw the object as they were driving in their car, near the town of Agudos in Sao Paulo state. They hopped out of the car to shoot the video with their handheld camera.

According to the TV station, the cinematographers reported the earth shaking at about the same time the object vanishes in a blast of light, noting that other people reported the earth moving in the same general area.

According to the U.S. Geological Survey's Earthquake Hazards Program, there have been no earthquakes in the area. Chile was rocked by a few earthquakes in recent days, notably a 6.8 magnitude temblor on February 11.

Video-editing expert Philip Cavaca told G1 that the film was a well-made montage -- but a hoax nonetheless.

"It can be seen in one frame," he told the station. "When the truck goes by, you can tell that the UFO was moved, which is un-noticeable to the naked eye," he said. According to Cavaca, by freezing the image you can see the exact frame in which the "UFO" alters.

The station did not reveal the identity of the videographers, but did say that the video was the talk of the town in Sao Paulo.




'UFO Sightings' Could Soon Explode, Thanks to Venus
Planetariums, observatories, weather offices and perhaps even police stations should be prepared to receive a bevy of inquiries during the next couple of weeks concerning a strange "UFO" that will soon be making appearances low in the eastern sky just before sunrise.

The unusual lateness of sunrise may add to the confusion for skywatchers, since it coincides with the sudden arrival of the bright sky apparition. But there's no need to be alarmed.

That bright light in the sky is only the planet Venus, which returns to visibility Wednesday, Nov. 3.

This sky map shows where to look to spot Venus on that date.

Venus shines bright

Venus' bright arrival comes in the midst of likely darkness for those who are heading out to work and school in the morning. [Gallery: Photos of Venus]

This is an artifact of daylight saving time. Since daylight saving time was extended into the first week of November in 2008, sunrises at this time occur later than even in the dead of winter.

Indeed, for some parts of the country, the sun doesn't rise until after 8 a.m. local time.

That means that countless millions are starting their days with the stars as their morning companion. Perhaps you've driven to work under the cover of darkness, or waited at a bus or train station and have looked around and gotten acquainted with the starry background.

If you've been glancing toward the east-southeast part of the sky, you probably haven't noticed anything particularly noteworthy or eye-catching.

Morning sky change looms

But it will all change quite suddenly on the morning of Nov. 3.

On that morning, about a half-hour before sunrise, a dazzling silvery-white star-like object will suddenly appear just above the east-southeast horizon. It's likely to take more than a few people by surprise, since it simply wasn't there on previous mornings. And, on following mornings, it will appear noticeably higher on the horizon.

This is Venus, beginning a spectacular morning apparition.

It climbs nearly 10 degrees high (a portion of the sky that can be covered by your clenched fist held at arm's length) at sunrise on Nov. 6 – the final morning of daylight saving time. Clocks will be set back one hour the following day and sunrises will come an hour earlier, but by then, Venus will be firmly established as a dazzling harbinger of sunrise.

Venus will be 20 degrees high at sunrise on Nov. 16, and 27 degrees on Nov. 25 as seen from Northern Hemisphere locations around 40 degrees north latitude.

As November ends, Venus rises a full three hours before the sun and hangs almost 30 degrees high at sunrise. Venus will brighten impressively throughout the month. For early morning commuters, who will likely wonder about this brilliant luminary bursting upon the predawn scene, Venus will no doubt call attention to itself.

Venus' quick transition

Some might wonder why Venus will become so quickly established as a dazzling morning entity compared with those occasions when it seems to take many days or weeks — sometimes even months — to transition into the evening sky.

The difference lies in Venus' position relative to the Earth. When Venus moves from the morning sky into the evening sky (called "superior conjunction") it's located on the opposite side of the sun relative to Earth.

Located at about 160 million miles from Earth on these occasions, Venus is moving at its slowest speed against the background stars. What's more, it is also moving in the same apparent direction against the stars as the sun — to the east.

So in the days leading up to and then even after superior conjunction, Venus continues to languish in the bright glare of the sun.

Finally — and very gradually — Venus moves just far enough away from the sun to be glimpsed for a short time, low near the western horizon shortly after sunset. Perhaps after a number of weeks, the planey climbs high enough to become conspicuous to all in our evening sky.

But in a morning transition, things are much different.

At inferior conjunction (which is where Venus was on Oct. 28), the planet passed between Earth and the sun. It was also only about 25 million miles from Earth – more than six times closer than it is at superior conjunction.

So Venus is moving much faster against the background stars. And, most importantly, as seen from our Earthly vantage point, the sun and Venus appear to be moving in opposite directions.

While the sun plods along toward the east, Venus is racing away to the west, which allows it to literally appear to "bolt" into the morning sky and become readily established as a predawn beacon over the span of just a week or two, as opposed to many weeks in the evening.

And lastly, because Venus is so much nearer, morning apparitions begin with the planet already near its peak brilliance.

Crescent Venus

This phase of Venus looks most remarkable through a telescope, especially early in November. Observers with optical aid will be treated to the marvel of a huge (close to an arc minute long), but wire-thin, crescent (only a few percent illuminated) when Venus is first sighted after inferior conjunction.

You can even see the crescent with 7x50 binoculars, and some folks with exceptional eyesight might even be able to perceive it without optical aid.

So if you hear about any strange UFO sightings being made in the early morning hours during the coming weeks, at least you now know what it likely is.




