Mississippi man, who shunned spotlight, recalls alleged 1973 incident with UFO
Charles Hickson never regretted the notoriety that came his way after he told authorities he encountered an unidentified flying object and its occupants 40 years ago on the banks of the Pascagoula River. Until his death in 2011, Hickson told his story to anyone who would listen.

But Calvin Parker Jr., the other man present for one of the most high-profile UFO cases in American history, has never come to terms with what he still says was a visit with gray, crab-clawed creatures from somewhere else. He says the encounter on Oct. 11, 1973, turned his life upside down.
"This is something I really didn't want to happen," Parker told The Associated Press as the 40th anniversary of the encounter approached.
Parker was unnerved by initial crush of unwelcome attention, with newsmen and UFO enthusiasts overrunning Walker Shipyard, where he and Hickson worked. He tried to dodge the spotlight for decades, moving frequently before returning to Mississippi's Gulf Coast in recent years.

"They gave a thorough, I mean a thorough, examination to me just like any doctor would"
- Calvin Parker Jr

The incident made headlines, sparked a wave of UFO sightings nationwide and became one of the most widely examined cases on record. Skeptics ranged from the deputies who first interviewed the men to an author who sought to poke holes in the story, and Parker himself has had conflicting thoughts about whether he was visited by aliens or demons.

Parker, now 58, was 18 when he went fishing with Hickson on a tranquil Thursday night after work.

As they dangled their lines without much luck, the two said a UFO with blue lights swooped down. They told of a zipping noise made by the object.

Hickson, then 42, said three creatures with leathery gray skin and crab-like claws - he thought they were robots - took them by the forearms and levitated them aboard the craft. He said something that looked like a large floating eye appeared to examine him.

Parker says he was conscious but paralyzed.

"They gave a thorough, I mean a thorough, examination to me just like any doctor would," he said.

And then they were back on the shore, where it all began. The UFO was gone and Parker said they tried to collect themselves. Hickson needed three shots of liquor from a bottle in his car to calm his nerves before deciding to report what happened.

At the Jackson County Sheriff's Department, deputies initially suspected both men were drunk.

Then-Capt. Glenn Ryder, who still works for the sheriff's office, said he laughed at the report, but met with the men. Parker and Hickson stuck to their story.

After the formal interview, deputies left Hickson and Parker together in a room with a hidden tape recorder, hoping to catch them in a lie.

"Me and the other investigator got up and left to let them talk, to see if they were going to say, `Well, we got them fooled,' but they didn't," Ryder said. "They were really concerned."

On the tape, Hickson tells Parker, "It scared me to death too, son. You can't get over it in a lifetime. Jesus Christ have mercy."

"I don't know what happened to them," Ryder said. "I wasn't there with them, but I know you don't fake fear, and they were fearful. They were fearful."

The next afternoon, the story was splashed across the front pages of newspapers in Pascagoula and Gulfport. Overnight, Pascagoula became a magnet for news reporters and UFO investigators.

Widespread interest in UFOs began in the 1940s with an incident at Roswell N.M., in which UFO enthusiasts believe the government got its hands on a crashed UFO and alien bodies. The government spent decades denying it.

In the 1960s, interest flared anew with a series of reports, including the purported alien abduction of New Hampshire couple Betty and Barney Hill in 1961. The widespread attention to the Pascagoula encounter set off a new round of reports.

In south Mississippi, hundreds of reports overwhelmed authorities in the two weeks after the Hickson-Parker encounter.

There were hoaxes and humor too. A Long Beach, Miss., taxi driver told police a being with pincers tapped on his window, a story he admitted days later was fake.

A Mobile, Ala., television station said it would record a UFO appearance predicted by a psychic between Mobile and nearby Pascagoula. Roughly 1,000 cars converged on the spot, where nothing happened.

An Ocean Springs alderman proposed an ordinance making it illegal to operate a UFO at more than twice the speed of light on U.S. 90, the coast's main drag. Mayor Tom Stennis voted against the ordinance, joking he didn't want to discourage tourism.

UFO skeptic Philip Klass believed Hickson and Parker's report was a hoax. In his book "UFOs Explained," he noted Hickson changed some details of his story and claimed a polygraph operator whose test Hickson passed wasn't up to the task. Parker later passed a lie detector test himself.

Hickson would go on to appear on talk shows, give lectures and interviews, and self-publish a book in 1983 titled "UFO Contact at Pascagoula." He reported three more encounters in 1974, and said the aliens communicated to him that they were peaceful.

"The only thing he wanted to do was let everybody know we were not alone," said Eddie Hickson, his son. "He didn't care if you believed him or not. If you wanted to listen, by gum, he'd tell you."

"He could never understand why he was chosen," the younger Hickson added. "But he never once told me that he wished it had never happened. Never."

Parker said the intrusions by curiosity seekers have become less frequent over the years, but have never really let up. "You don't never have no privacy," he said.

Parker married later in 1973 and eventually took oil industry and out-of-state construction jobs to escape the attention.

"By the time you get somewhere and they figure out who you were, I'd just go," he said. "I'd just go find another job somewhere."

Parker attended some UFO conventions, and was once hypnotized by Budd Hopkins, a noted UFO investigator. He briefly tried to capitalize on his story in 1993 by starting a Louisiana company called UFO Investigations where he and partners would produce television segments on the subject.

Parker moved to Moss Point in 2006 and in 2010 suffered a stroke that limited him physically. He's on disability aid now, but sometimes boats by the site of the encounter when he goes fishing. He said that just recently he met a woman at a gas station who already knew who he was.

"I'm always recognized," he said.

There's no historical marker on the river bank noting the encounter, and stores don't sell UFO souvenirs. But local people remember - though often with skepticism and jokes.

For his part, Parker said he's had conflicting thoughts over the years about that night in 1973. At one point, he wasn't even sure the creatures were aliens. They might have been demons, he said.

"I'm a firm believer in God and where there's good, there's bad," Parker said.




Passenger Jet Almost Collided With UFO Over England
A passenger jet coming in to land at Heathrow Airport had a near miss with a UFO, according to newly-released British Ministry of Defense files.

The captain of the Alitalia airliner was so concerned he shouted "look out" to his co-pilot after seeing the brown missile-shaped object shoot past them overhead.

The mysterious incident near Lydd in Kent in 1991 was thoroughly investigated by Britain's Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and the British military.

But having ruled out the object being a missile, weather balloon or space rocket, the MoD closed the inquiry and left the matter unsolved.

The unexplained close encounter is one of many recounted in military UFO documents now made available online by the National Archives.

Documents show the McDonnell Douglas MD80 aircraft was en route from Milan to Heathrow at 22,000 feet with 57 people on board when pilot Achille Zaghetti saw the strange object 1,000 feet above him.

He recounted: "At once I said, 'look out, look out,' to my co-pilot, who looked out and saw what I had seen.

"As soon as the object crossed us I asked to the ACC (area control center) operator if he saw something on his screen and he answered 'I see an unknown target 10 nm (nautical miles) behind you'."




Russian Navy Reveals Its Secret UFO Encounters
It sounds like the classic science movie "The Abyss" — only in Russian.

The Russian Navy has declassified its records of UFO encounters, many of which take place in or around water, reports the Web site of the English-language Russian news channel Russia Today.

"They are most often seen in the deepest part of the Atlantic Ocean, in the southern part of the Bermuda Triangle, and also in the Caribbean Sea," said one naval intelligence officer quoted by the Web site.

Another incident cited involved six unknown objects that followed a nuclear submarine in the Pacific. When the sub surfaced, so did the objects — which then lifted themselves out of the water and flew away.

In perhaps the most compelling account, military divers in Siberia's Lake Baikal, the world's deepest lake, encountered "a group of humanoid creatures dressed in silvery suits" at a depth of 160 feet. Three humans died during the ensuing chase.




Russian Scientist: UFO Crashed Into Meteorite to Save Earth

Did a UFO deliberately crash into a meteor to save Earth 100 years ago? That's what one Russian scientist is claiming.

Dr. Yuri Labvin, president of the Tunguska Spatial Phenomenon Foundation, insists that an alien spacecraft sacrificed itself to prevent a gigantic meteor from slamming into the planet above Siberia on June 30, 1908.

The result was was the Tunguska event, a massive blast estimated at 15 megatons that downed 80 million trees over nearly 100 square miles. Eyewitnesses reported a bright light and a huge shock wave, but the area was so sparsely populated no one was killed.

Most scientists think the blast was caused by a meteorite exploding several miles above the surface. But Labvin thinks quartz slabs with strange markings found at the site are remnants of an alien control panel, which fell to the ground after the UFO slammed into the giant rock.

"We don't have any technologies that can print such kind of drawings on crystals," Labvin told the Macedonian International News Agency. "We also found ferrum silicate that can not be produced anywhere, except in space."




Possible 'Mile-Wide UFO' Spotted by British Airline Pilot
What's white, glows, is a mile wide and flies?

That's what the pilot and passengers of a British jetliner want to know after they reported seeing an unidentified flying objectfitting that description outside their aircraft windows over the Channel Islands.

The craft is allegedly one of the largest UFOs ever seen, the Evening Standard reported Friday.

• Click here to read the Evening Standard story,

Citing an official air-miss report on the incident several weeks ago in Pilot magazine, the newspaper stated that Aurigny Airlines Capt. Ray Bowyer first caught sight of the object while flying close to Alderney , one of several islands in the English Channel located off the Normandy coast.

Bowyer described the object as “a cigar-shaped brilliant white light.”

"It was a very sharp, thin yellow object with a green area," Bowyer, 50, told the Evening Standard, noting that he used a pair of binoculars to view the flying craft more closely. "It was 2,000 feet up and stationary. I thought it was about 10 miles away, although I later realized it was approximately 40 miles from us.

"At first, I thought it was the size of a [Boeing] 737, but it must have been much bigger because of how far away it was. It could have been as much as a mile wide."

• Click here to visit FOXNews.com's Space Center.

Bowyer told the magazine that he then spotted a "second identical object further to the west," stating that it was the same size but appeared smaller because it was farther away from the plane than the first craft was.

Some passengers and an unnamed pilot with the Blue Islands airline later confirmed the sighting, the Evening Standard reported.

The Civil Aviation Authority safety notice stated that another aircraft, a Tri-Lander, flying nearby Alderney also spotted the soaring object.




2 UFO sightings have China, blogs abuzz
(CNN) -- Talk about eerie.
One of two recent UFO sightings in China occurred almost on the 63rd anniversary of news that a "flying disc" had been found in Roswell, New Mexico.
And like in 1947, people either choose to believe or be skeptical that visitors have stopped by from outer space.
Nothing has officially been ruled in or out by Chinese officials, who are looking into whether the objects were private or military aircraft, rocket flares, reflection in the sky or something else.
The first sighting occurred at Hangzhou's Xiaoshan Airport, in the eastern part of the country, according to the state-controlled Xinhua news agency.
Eighteen flights were delayed or rerouted and operations shut down after twinkling lights were spotted above the terminal around 9 p.m. July 7, the agency said. According to Xinhua, speculation has centered on a private aircraft. The state-run China Daily quoted a source saying the object had a military connection.
"No conclusion has yet been drawn," said Wang Jian, head of air traffic control with Zhejiang branch of the Civil Aviation Administration of China, and the investigation continues.
Purported photos of the unworldly object have appeared online and on YouTube.
Meanwhile, The Shanghai Daily reported a UFO appeared above the city of Chongqing on Thursday.
Witnesses said four "lantern-like objects forming a diamond shape" hovered for an hour above a park.
"I stared at it and it did not move," one resident told the newspaper. "After hovering for an hour, the thing started to fly higher and finally out of people's sight."
UFO sightings around the world are common, but a little rarer in China.
The International UFO Museum and Research Center in Roswell, New Mexico, educates visitors, conducts research and receives sighting reports.
Its website summarizes the Roswell incident, which came to light July 8, 1947. "Once it became public, the event known as The Roswell Incident, the crash of an alleged flying saucer, the recovery of debris and bodies and the ensuing cover up by the military was of such magnitude and so shrouded in mystery, that 60 years later there are still more questions than answers."
The U.S. government has long contended that no aliens or spaceships were found.
Mark Briscoe, library director for the museum, said the center looks for credibility whenever it records UFO reports, including a documented date, time and location. He sees many photos, and an outside researcher provides information.
"You can tell some of them are a little different. A little off," Briscoe said of some UFO submissions. But he recently recorded 300 he found to be credible.
He said one of the photos circulating about the Chinese airport could be legitimate, but he had not seen the others.
The blog Forgetomori weighed in on Internet and news media images purporting to be from Xiaoshan Airport.
"All of these other photos, with the exception of a single one, are also simply long-exposure photos of aircrafts, but in this case, helicopters," the blog says. "Not only that, they have nothing to do with China and were published on the web long ago."




Former astronaut: Man not alone in universe
(CNN) -- Earth Day may fall later this week, but as far as former NASA astronaut Edgar Mitchell and other UFO enthusiasts are concerned, the real story is happening elsewhere.
Mitchell, who was part of the 1971 Apollo 14 moon mission, asserted Monday that extraterrestrial life exists, and that the truth is being concealed by the U.S. and other governments.

He delivered his remarks during an appearance at the National Press Club following the conclusion of the fifth annual X-Conference, a meeting of UFO activists and researchers studying the possibility of alien life forms.

Mankind has long wondered if we're "alone in the universe. [But] only in our period do we really have evidence. No, we're not alone," Mitchell said.

"Our destiny, in my opinion, and we might as well get started with it, is [to] become a part of the planetary community. ... We should be ready to reach out beyond our planet and beyond our solar system to find out what is really going on out there."
Mitchell grew up in Roswell, New Mexico, which some UFO believers maintain was the site of a UFO crash in 1947. He said residents of his hometown "had been hushed and told not to talk about their experience by military authorities." They had been warned of "dire consequences" if they did so.
But, he claimed, they "didn't want to go to the grave with their story. They wanted to tell somebody reliable. And being a local boy and having been to the moon, they considered me reliable enough to whisper in my ear their particular story."

Roughly 10 years ago, Mitchell claimed, he was finally given an appointment at Pentagon to discuss what he had been told.

An unnamed admiral working for the Joint Chiefs of Staff promised to uncover the truth behind the Roswell story, Mitchell said. The stories of a UFO crash "were confirmed," but the admiral was then denied access when he "tried to get into the inner workings of that process."

The same admiral, Mitchell claimed, now denies the story.

"I urge those who are doubtful: Read the books, read the lore, start to understand what has really been going on. Because there really is no doubt we are being visited," he said.

"The universe that we live in is much more wondrous, exciting, complex and far-reaching than we were ever able to know up to this point in time."

A NASA spokesman denied any cover-up.

"NASA does not track UFOs. NASA is not involved in any sort of cover-up about alien life on this planet or anywhere else -- period," Michael Cabbage said Monday.

Debates have continued about what happened at Roswell. The U.S. Air Force said in 1994 that wreckage recovered there in 1947 was most likely from a balloon-launched classified government project.

Stephen Bassett, head of the Paradigm Research Group (PRG), which hosted the X-Conference, said that the truth about extraterrestrial life is being suppressed because it is politically explosive.

"There is a third rail [in American politics], and that is the UFO question. It is many magnitudes more radioactive than Social Security ever dreamed to be," Bassett said.




UFOs eyed nukes, ex-Air Force personnel say
Seven former U.S. Air Force personnel gathered in Washington Monday to recount UFO sightings over nuclear weapons facilities in decades past – accounts that a UFO researcher says show extraterrestrial beings are interested in the world’s nuclear arms race and may be sending humans a message.

At a news conference at the National Press Club, the six former officers and one ex-enlisted man recalled either personal sightings or reports from subordinates and others of UFOs hovering over nuclear missile silos or nuclear weapons storage areas in the 1960s, '70s and '80s.

Three of the former Air Force officers – though they hadn’t seen the UFOs themselves - told reporters that UFOs hovering over silos around Montana’s Malmstrom Air Force Base in 1967 appeared to have temporarily deactivated some of the nuclear missiles.

Much of the testimony already has appeared in books, websites and elsewhere. But UFO researcher and author Robert Hastings, who organized the news conference, said the time has come for the U.S. government to acknowledge the UFO visits.

“I believe - these gentlemen believe - that this planet is being visited by beings from another world, who for whatever reason have taken an interest in the nuclear arms race which began at the end of World War II,” said Hastings, who added that more than 120 former military personnel have told him about UFOs visiting nuclear sites.

“Regarding the missile shutdown incidents, my opinion … is that whoever are aboard these craft are sending a signal to both Washington and Moscow, among others, that we are playing with fire – that the possession and threatened use of nuclear weapons potentially threatens the human race and the integrity of the planetary environment,” he said.

Former Air Force Capt. Robert Salas – who has written a book about the Montana incidents – said he was underground when a UFO hovered over his missile silo in March 1967, and therefore couldn’t see it. He said one of his guards above ground told him a red, glowing object about 30 feet in diameter was hovering just above the front gate of the facility, in an isolated area far from Malmstrom.

“And just as I [called my commander], our missiles began going into what’s called a no-go condition, or unlaunchable. Essentially, they were disabled while this object was still hovering over out site,” Salas said.

Salas and others said the military urged them at the time not to talk about the incidents.

Retired Col. Charles Halt recalled seeing UFOs over the woods near Royal Air Force Stations Bentwaters and Woodbridge in eastern England in December 1980. He and security personnel were investigating reports of strange lights just outside one of the bases.

“All through the forest was a bright glowing object,” he said Monday. “The best way I can describe it, it looked like an eye – with bright red, with a dark center. It appeared to be winking. It was shedding something like molten metal, was dripping off it.

“It silently moved through the trees, avoiding any contact, it bobbed up and down, and at one point it actually approached us. We tried to get closer. It receded out into the field, beyond the forest, and silently exploded into five white objects – gone. So we went out into the field looking for any evidence, because something had been apparently falling off it – and we find nothing,” he said.

He recalled subsequently seeing other objects in the sky, including one that stopped about 3,000 feet overhead and “sent down a concentrated beam at our feet.” No one was harmed.

“The best way I can equate it is sort of a laser beam. We stood there in awe. Was this a warning? Was this an attempt to communicate? Was this a weapon? Or just a probe?” he said.

At about the same time, he was hearing radio reports from base personnel that beams from some of the objects were “falling into or near the weapons storage area.”

In a staff meeting later, a general decided “it happened off base, so it’s a British affair,” Halt recalled. “In other words, they were loathe to get involved.”

The Air Force investigated UFOs from 1948 to 1969 under a program eventually called Project Blue Book. The service, on its website, says the project concluded that “no UFO reported, investigated, and evaluated by the Air Force has ever given any indication of threat to our national security.” It also says there has been "no evidence that sightings categorized as 'unidentified' are extraterrestrial vehicles."

Salas said the UFO phenomenon “is real, not imaginary.”

“There is current excessive secrecy in our government surrounding this phenomenon,” he said.

A reporter asked how many of the former military personnel subscribed to Hastings’ theory that the message of extraterrestrials is that humans should get rid of nuclear weapons, and how many of them believed that we should get rid of nukes. Of the seven, it appeared that only Salas raised his hand.




UK: Jet captain reported UFO sighting
LONDON, England (CNN) -- Thousands of documents about reported UFO sightings -- ranging from calm accounts by professional pilots to unhinged rants about the extraterrestrial menace -- have been released by the British Ministry of Defence.
The 4,500 pages cover sightings that were reported from 1986 through 1992. The British military released them to a curious public as part of a four-year project to transfer all such documents to the National Archives.

One highlight from the batch released Monday involves the captain of an Italian airliner. He shouted "Look out!" to his co-pilot in April 1991 after claiming to see a beige "missile-shaped object" shoot past the cockpit.

In that instance, the defence ministry ruled out a missile and "all the usual explanations," wrote David Clarke, a UFO expert and journalism instructor at Sheffield Hallam University, who worked with the National Archives to prepare the new materials for release.

"The end result was this was a genuine UFO and the file was simply closed," he wrote. "There was nothing more they could do."

The newly released documents also carry an account by a U.S. Air Force pilot who says he was told to shoot down an unidentified flying craft over eastern England. But before he could fire, the object disappeared.
The next day, a man arrived to debrief the pilot and "he was told in no uncertain terms that what he had seen on his radar was top secret and he wasn't to speak about it to anyone," Clarke wrote.

The first set of files was made available to members of the public in May. It covered reported UFO sightings from 1978 to 1987, and included hundreds of police reports taken from witnesses who described seeing lights or strange objects in the sky.

People who reported having seen UFOs typically describe various shapes and colors of lights, moving in formation or hovering in the sky. Witnesses reported orange, red, white and green lights that were diamond-shaped, square, or cigar-shaped.

They reported them to police, who have a standard 16-question form specifically for UFO sightings.

"The vast majority of them are just ordinary people who've seen something unusual and thought that they ought to tell someone about it," Clarke has said.

The Ministry of Defence said it examined the reports solely to determine whether enemy aircraft had infiltrated British airspace. Once it was determined that no enemy aircraft were in the sky, it did not investigate further.

"The Ministry of Defence has no other interest or role regarding UFO matters and does not consider questions regarding the existence or otherwise of extraterrestrial life-forms," it said in May.

That left many incidents unexplained.




Symington: I saw a UFO in the Arizona sky
Former Arizona Governor Fife Symington will be moderating a November 12 event at the National Press Club where he will discuss the Phoenix Lights incident. He says he will be joined by 14 former high-ranking military and government officials from seven countries who will share evidence from what they call their own UFO experiences and investigations.
(CNN) -- In 1997, during my second term as governor of Arizona, I saw something that defied logic and challenged my reality.

I witnessed a massive delta-shaped, craft silently navigate over Squaw Peak, a mountain range in Phoenix, Arizona. It was truly breathtaking. I was absolutely stunned because I was turning to the west looking for the distant Phoenix Lights.

To my astonishment this apparition appeared; this dramatically large, very distinctive leading edge with some enormous lights was traveling through the Arizona sky.

As a pilot and a former Air Force Officer, I can definitively say that this craft did not resemble any man-made object I'd ever seen. And it was certainly not high-altitude flares because flares don't fly in formation.

The incident was witnessed by hundreds -- if not thousands -- of people in Arizona, and my office was besieged with phone calls from very concerned Arizonians.

The growing hysteria intensified when the story broke nationally. I decided to lighten the mood of the state by calling a press conference where my chief of staff arrived in an alien costume. We managed to lessen the sense of panic but, at the same time, upset many of my constituents.
I would now like to set the record straight. I never meant to ridicule anyone. My office did make inquiries as to the origin of the craft, but to this day they remain unanswered.

Eventually the Air Force claimed responsibility stating that they dropped flares.

This is indicative of the attitude from official channels. We get explanations that fly in the face of the facts. Explanations like weather balloons, swamp gas and military flares.

I was never happy with the Air Force's silly explanation. There might very well have been military flares in the sky that evening, but what I and hundreds of others saw had nothing to do with that.

I now know that I am not alone. There are many high-ranking military, aviation and government officials who share my concerns. While on active duty, they have either witnessed a UFO incident or have conducted an official investigation into UFO cases relevant to aviation safety and national security.

By speaking out with me, these people are putting their reputations on the line. They have fought in wars, guarded top secret weapons arsenals and protected our nation's skies.

We want the government to stop putting out stories that perpetuate the myth that all UFOs can be explained away in down-to-earth conventional terms. Investigations need to be re-opened, documents need to be unsealed and the idea of an open dialogue can no longer be shunned.

Incidents like these are not going away. About a year ago, Chicago's O'Hare International Airport experienced a UFO event that made national and international headlines.

What I saw in the Arizona sky goes beyond conventional explanations. When it comes to events of this nature that are still completely unsolved, we deserve more openness in government, especially our own.




Silicon Valley CEO turns UFO evangelist
(IDG) -- Joe Firmage does not seem crazy. His words do not echo like the proclamations of a zealot but rather are delivered in a controlled, deliberate, boardroom fashion. They sound like the words of a man who was forming a strategy for building Web sites one day - and forming a strategy for a techno-spiritual evolution the next. Somehow, Firmage's manner makes the progression seem natural.

Joe Firmage wants you to believe what he believes. To wit:

"You are a homo sapien animal, sitting at the top of an 8,000-mile-wide clump of geology, staring into an electronic communications system called 'the Internet' ... 2,000 revolutions around this globe since the birth of a man named Jesus. That's a more accurate picture of you in the eyes of the cosmos right now."

Joe Firmage says that without blinking.
Joseph P. Firmage, 28, founded USWeb, a leading Internet consulting firm, in 1995. Like his previous ventures, the company prospered wildly. For fiscal 1998, USWeb posted revenue of $228 million - a 100% increase over the previous year.

During that year of intense growth, Joe Firmage was moonlighting - working on the Kairos Project, a Web site and book (due this summer) about human evolution and extraterrestrials.

Word got out. In January, Firmage posted his 700-page manifesto, called "The Truth" (www.thewordistruth.org), which evokes both Star Trek and the New Testament. In the manifesto, Firmage asserts that extraterrestrials not only have visited us, but also have influenced our technological development.

A few days later, he resigned.

So is he a "crackpot," as USWeb/CKS (the companies merged shortly before Firmage left) board member Gary Reischel recently pronounced him, summing up what he'd heard from colleagues and investors? Or is he a maverick entrepreneur with disturbing ideas who is paying with his credibility for the strength of his convictions?

Quiet certainty

Joe Firmage does not look like a man who's spent 3 million of his own dollars researching extraterrestrials. In tony Los Gatos, Calif., in a living room almost too small for its opulent furniture, he speaks without flourish, with pregnant pauses and sustained eye-blinks as much as with bold words. He wears a discreetly trimmed beard and is dressed casually, as per the uniform of Silicon Valley executives (including mandatory cell phone, which periodically interrupts an interview). Out front in the driveway, a cardboard Jesus hangs from the rearview mirror of his red Corvette.

Firmage is both savvy and candid about all the attention the world is paying him. "I've been very open to the media for 10 years now in a business context," he says, but "I've given nobody reason to question my sanity until six months ago. I'm just starting to get the PR structure to deal with the media."

When he first published his manifesto, the news stories tended toward predictable snickering, but Firmage says he believes "it's beginning to shift in the right direction. Rolling Stone is doing a good piece on us. Time's already done something. I'll be on Dateline [NBC]. I just spent the whole day with ABC News."

How does he expect those TV interviews to go? "Everything can and will be used against me," he laughs.

Early achiever

Firmage was born and raised in Salt Lake City, where his family belonged to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ("It's a very cosmic thing," he says of the Mormon church). After finishing high school in a mere two years, a scholarship in physics led him to the University of Utah. Firmage left college in 1989 after his sophomore year to form his first venture: Serius, which began as a Macintosh program for his mother's greeting card business and quickly grew into a database software company. Result? "Within six months," Firmage says, Serius "closed $7 million" in revenue.

In 1993, Firmage sold the company to Novell Inc. for $24 million and a vice presidency. In 1995, he left to found USWeb.

According to Novell public relations manager Jonathan Cohen, the company considered Firmage a "valued contributor.... We wouldn't comment on his beliefs or cultural activities."

The real deal

"I am convinced that the UFO phenomenon is absolutely legitimate," Firmage says. "I have sat across the table from people whose credibility is unimpeachable." People who have described to him in great detail their experiences as alien abductees, he says. Asked to mention names, he replies, "I can't."

The cultural activities Cohen mentions can be traced, Firmage says, to a vision he had early one morning in 1997, shortly before USWeb's initial public offering. A mysterious figure clad in white hovered over his bed, he recalls. The two shared a brief conversation about space-time travel. When asked by the visitor why he should be given the chance to travel in space, Firmage said, "because I'm willing to die for it."

The following year was "the busiest time of my professional life," he says. "I held a 12-hour-per-day job at USWeb, with Kairos [the UFO project] growing to four to six hours per day. I had a simple system: daytime: USWeb; evening: Kairos."

A year after the visit, Firmage posted his manuscript online. A media flood followed. Then came investor jitters.

"For the record, I chose to step down," Firmage says. "And off the record, I chose to step down. That's the truth. I was not forced out. Now, had I not chosen to step down, I could well have been forced out. I've been 10 years in this valley. I know how the game is played."

Is there no room for visions like his in Silicon Valley? "I would like the answer to be yes. But right now ... no." Maybe that's why, Firmage claims, there are several Silicon Valley leaders hiding their own belief in extraterrestrials (he declines several times to mention names). Why the need to remain quiet? "Well, look what happened to me."

Man of principle?

"Frankly, I admire the guy," says author and columnist Robert Cringely. "In a world filled with weasels who call themselves entrepreneurs and who will corrupt their business plan to fit whatever is this week's hot technology, Firmage stands out as a man of principle."

And now out of the boardroom, Firmage is free to discuss those principles. "I can say things I could never say" when at the helm of USWeb, he says. "Every single executive of a public company has to live that way." He says Steve Jobs and Bill Gates are exceptions who "have a measure of freedom that anybody just one notch down on that ladder does not have."

One of Firmage's goals, he says, "is to make things that have not been permitted to be spoken in open company, speakable. Things that deal with anomalies. Things that deal with spirituality."

Things like zero-point energy and gravitational propulsion. Those controversial theories of physics underpin Firmage's belief in space-time travel. Zero-point energy refers to a theory that energy can be created from nothing, rather than matter. Gravitational propulsion is based on the concept that the force of gravity can not only be harnessed, but also engineered. Combined, the two provide the foundation for spacecraft capable of warp speeds.

Firmage's beliefs have backers. John Peterson, a futurist and head of the Arlington Institute, a nonprofit research group in Arlington, Va., is adamant about zero-point energy. "There's no question but that it's real." And Charles Ostman, senior fellow at the San Francisco-based Institute for Global Futures, says that, in 25 to 50 years, "we probably will have things like antigravity travel, time-space continuum manipulation - all the usual precursors [to] getting around the universe."

Not all scientists agree. In fact, not all seekers of extraterrestrials agree. Dan Wertheimer, director of the University of California at Berkeley's Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence program, calls Firmage's ideas "pretty wacko ... you'd be hard-pressed to find any scientist that thought there was an ounce of credibility in his ideas."

Visionary or crackpot?

You'd also be hard-pressed to find a Silicon Valley CEO who doesn't drone on about vision and evolution and progress. If nothing else, Joe Firmage's story is the story of what happens when the vision becomes intensely personal, when public relations buffers melt away and the board runs for cover.

It's impossible not to wonder at Firmage's motivations. Is this story about a yearning for liberation from the corporate structure? (When USWeb and CKS merged, Firmage was not named CEO of the combined company.) Is Firmage after a piece of history? Is this a publicity trick, a plan to get richer? (After all, that cell phone keeps ringing.)

Or is this as simple as one man telling his version of the truth - and paying for it dearly:

"What happens in the history of a world when its most advanced beings for the first time gain the power to break through its own gravity well?" Joe Firmage asks. "I'll tell you what it's called; it's called birth. If Earth is a living being, and we are created by the Earth, and we one day gain that power, the power to touch the fabric of space-time itself, and use it, tap it, to voyage - is that not literally a birth? And is not the history of humanity an incredible drum roll to the opening of the first real frontier? That's the vision that I see."




Rep. Dennis Kucinich Acknowledges UFO Sighting
The truth is out there, and Ohio Rep. Dennis Kucinich had no trouble offering his version of it when asked Tuesday night about his UFO sighting.

"It was an unidentified flying object, OK? It's, like, it's unidentified," Kucinich said during one of the few highlights at the Democratic presidential debate in Philadelphia. "I saw something."

Kucinich, whose UFO run-in came to light last week in a passage from Shirley MacLaine's new book, went on to joke that he planned to move his campaign office to Roswell, N.M. Roswell is the place where legend holds a spacecraft crash-landed in 1947 and was recovered and moved for investigation to nearby Area 51, a secretive U.S. government airbase in Nevada.

Kucinich went on to defend himself, saying many Americans have shared his experience.

"You have to keep in mind that more — that Jimmy Carter saw a UFO and also that more people in this country have seen UFOs than I think approve of George Bush's presidency," Kucinich said.

Debate moderator Tim Russert then cited a poll saying that 14 percent of Americans claim to have seen a UFO, to which Kucinich asked: "What as that percentage?"

"Fourteen," Russert answered.

"Thank you," Kucinich responded with satisfaction.

President Bush's approval rating stood at 35 percent in the most recent FOX News-Opinion Dynamics poll, but only 12 percent of Democrats gave him a thumbs up.

Earlier Tuesday, Kucinich questioned the president's mental state in lieu of comments made about a nuclear Iran sparking World War III.

"I seriously believe we have to start asking questions about his mental health," Kucinich said in an interview with The Philadelphia Inquirer. "There's something wrong. He does not seem to understand his words have real impact."

According to MacLaine, Kucinich saw the UFO in the 1980s while visiting the actress at her home in Washington state.

"He saw a gigantic triangular craft, silent and observing him," MacLaine wrote. "It hovered for about 10 minutes or so and sped away with a speed he couldn't comprehend. He felt a connection in his heart and heard directions in his mind."

Moving on in the debate questioning, Russert asked Sen. Barack Obama about his belief in the existence of life beyond Earth.

"I don't presume to know. What I know is there is life here on Earth, and — and that we're not attending to life here on Earth," Obama said.




U.S. Pilot Ordered to Shoot Down UFO Over England
A former Top Gun said Sunday he was ordered to shoot down a massive UFO over Norwich, England, 50 years ago.

RAF controllers told U.S. pilot Milton Torres to “lock on” and launch all 24 of his rockets over the city.

But as he came within seconds of firing at the alien intruder — “the size of an aircraft carrier” on his radar — it vanished at 10,000 mph.

The amazing close encounter is revealed in secret Ministry of Defense X-Files which are being declassified Monday.

Milton said, “It was some kind of alien snooping over England. I guess we’ll never know what it was.”

The incident happened in 1957 when Milton was a 26-year-old U.S. Air Force lieutenant based at RAF Manston in Kent, England.

At 11 p.m. one night he was ordered to scramble in his F-86D Sabre fighter to attack a “bogey” hovering above Norfolk.

Speaking about it publicly for the first time, he said: “I was told I would be firing a complete salvo, all 24 rockets. I was pumped up — this was the sort of thing that happened before a war.”

He got the UFO on his radar and closed for the attack at the Sabre’s top speed of almost 700 mph — then it disappeared off his screen in a flash.

Milton, now 77, said: “I was smoking, as fast as I could go. This thing had a different propulsion system. It was not an airplane.”

The flyer said he was visited afterwards by a sinister security official and warned not to tell anyone — so he kept silent until now.

The close encounter is in 19 files made available online yesterday by the National Archives.




