Why limited Syria strike could hurt Turkey.
Democracy can get in the way of a good war in the Middle East, a reality underscored by the diminishing U.S. public support for intervention in Syria. But the ongoing discussions in Washington over how to respond to Syria’s alleged use of chemical weapons aren’t just being watched closely in Washington and Damascus. In Turkey – Syria’s neighbor and in the vanguard of the struggle against the al-Assad regime – the outcome of deliberations on an attack are critical. Indeed, while the West looks increasingly wary of military action, there are serious concerns in Ankara that Turkey’s security could be put at risk by a U.S.-led strike that is too limited in scope.
Turkey has diligently defended the idea of regime change in Syria prior to the alleged chemical weapons attack. Having rightfully desisted from a unilateral intervention, Turkey has focused its efforts on strengthening the opposition. Ankara has given substantial diplomatic and logistical – as well as more recently military – support to the Syrian rebels. But Ankara’s overt antagonism toward Damascus has started to exact a heavy toll.
Turkey is already host to close to half a million Syrian refugees. This inflow has given rise to social tensions between anti-Assad members of the Syrian coalition and pro-Assad Alawite Turks. Tensions boiled over in May when two car bombs allegedly smuggled in from Syria exploded in the Turkish border city of Reyhanli, killing dozens.
More from GPS: Is Turkey rethinking Syria Kurd issue?
Ankara has found itself stuck providing ongoing support to an ineffective and fragmented Syrian opposition, struggling to stem the rising flow of refugees into Turkey, and rightly concerned about the manifold security repercussions of the ongoing conflict. At the same time, the government’s campaign against al-Assad lacks strong domestic support, with Turkish public opinion remaining cautious about interfering in the internal affairs of other countries. Turkish leaders have also been facing public criticism for the growing gap between their ambitious and antagonistic rhetoric of regime change and their ability to alter the dynamics of the militarized power game in Syria.
Ankara considers the alleged devastating use of chemical weapons by the al-Assad regime as a much-needed game changer and hopes that this tragedy will finally force the international community out of its comfort zone.
Ankara wants the United States to launch a military campaign that will be instrumental in toppling al-Assad. It sees any effective campaign as needing to either decapitate the Syrian regime or at the very least weaken it substantially, so that the opposition can make real inroads toward capturing Damascus. The Turkish government fears that any alternative outcome will lead to al-Assad emerging buoyed and gloating after having survived a U.S. strike.
More from GPS: Turkey's jihadi dilemma
Meanwhile, there are fears that even a limited air strike, if it happens, will only add to “intervention fatigue” in the West. This could end up reducing the likelihood of a more expansive future military campaign in Syria. If this is the case, then al-Assad may become even more brutish. In addition to further raising the humanitarian costs of the conflict al-Assad may also become emboldened enough to act more aggressively against neighboring countries. Turkey would be particularly at risk, having championed outside intervention.
In a recent interview, Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal al-Mekdad claimed that Damascus would strike back not only at Israel, but also at Syria's neighbors Jordan and Turkey if they take part in any U.S.-led operation. Syria is believed to have 600 to 700 Scud-type ballistic missiles. The more advanced versions have a range of about 700 kilometers, meaning they can threaten most of Turkey’s territory and reach its capital, Ankara. They are potentially capable of carrying chemical and biological warheads.
Turkey has no national means to protect itself against such an attack. With NATO assistance, it has acquired six Patriot anti-missile batteries, which are now set up near the Syrian border. But these interceptors have a limited range of just 40 kilometers. Separately, Turkey is protected by NATO’s missile defense umbrella, but the effectiveness of this system, especially against ballistic missiles equipped with chemical warheads, remains unknown. Turkey’s border regions are additionally exposed to attacks by long-range artillery and rocket strikes.
Turkey’s best defense is the deterrence provided by its NATO membership. And Ankara hopes that Syria will resist from attacking Turkey because such an aggression would trigger NATO’s collective defense commitments. Ankara is now eagerly to see how things unfold on Capitol Hill and ultimately President Obama’s decision on how to act having initially backed the high-risk and possibly high-reward option of a comprehensive strike. But for Turkey’s own security interests, a token strike may not be worth a strike at all.
